# (1, 1) The history of number

1.1 The history of number . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1
1.1 The history of number
Figure 1.1: The envelop of
tokens in Uruk period from
Susa. Louvre MuseumThe number emerged with human evolution. Some people
believe that language was inspired by numbers. Our ancestors learned the numbers from the gathering and hunting
activities. People needed to count the gathered fruits. As
trading developed, people needed numeral tools to handle
bigger numbers than previously encountered.
W e found in the regions of Iran, people made clay tokens
for record keeping around 4000 BC. they created two round
tokens with ‘+’ sign baked to represent ”two sheep” . Each
token represented a sheep. Representing a hundred sheep
with many tokens would be impractical, so they invented
different clay tokens to represent ten sheep, twenty sheep
and so on. In order to avoid the record being altered, people invented a clay envelope in which tokens were placed,
sealed, and baked. If anybody disputed the number, they
could break open the envelope and do a recount. They also
pressed the signs outside the envelop before it was baked,
these signs on the outside became the first written language
for numbers[ 2]. Figure 1.1 shows the ancient clay tokens and
envelopes found in Uruk period.
As the number increasing, the clay tokens and envelops were gradually replaced by
more powerful numerals. About 3500 BC, the Sumerians in Mesopotamia used round
stylus in flat clay tablets to carve pictographs representing various tokens. Each sign
represented both commodity being counted and the quantity of that commodity .
The next big step happened around 3100 BC. The abstract numbers dissociated from
the thing being counted. W e found from the clay tablets, the things being counted were
indicated by pictographs carved with a sharp stylus next to round-stylus numerals. These
abstracted numerals later evolved to Babylonian cuneiform characters.
The abstract number emerged from intelligent mind. People realized the abstract
12 CHAPTER 1. NUMBERS
(a) Babylonian numerals[ 3]
 (b) The abstract three
three could represent three eggs, three trees, and three jars. It’s a powerful tool. People
can manipulate the pure numbers and apply the result to the concrete things. When
increase the abstract three by one to get four, we know gathering another egg after three
egges gives four eggs; we also know baking another jar after three jars gives four jars. W e
resolve a whole kind of problems instead of one by one.
Starting from the numbers, people developed add, subtraction, then the more powerful
methods of multiplication and division. When measure the length, angles, areas, and
volumes, we connected the number to the geometry quantity . People from different places
found the inner relationships and laws for the numbers and shapes. Ancient Egyptian,
Greece, and Chinese people found the Pythagoras theorem independently , and applied
it to the amazing works like to build the great pyramid. T race back from the modern
civilization, we find the natural number is the source of math and science. German
mathematician Kronecker said ‘God made the integers; all else is the work of man. ’1
