# (1, 2) Peano Axioms

1.2 Peano Axioms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2
1.2 Peano Axioms
Euclid’s Element is the first work introduced the axiomatic methods. F rom five axioms
and postulates, Euclid developed the laws one by one elaborately . Every result is only
based on the axioms and the theorems proved before. With this approach, he built the
great building of geometry . However, there was no axiomatic formal system for natural
numbers for long time. People considered natural numbers were straightforward and
the related facts were obvious. The axioms of natural number was setup by Italian
mathematician Peano till 1889. known as Peano Axioms nowadays. It’s interesting that
there are also five axioms.
1. 0 is a natural number. Expressed as 902N;
2. F or every natural number, there is a successor natural number. Expressed as 8n2
N,9n′=succ (n)2N;
It seems that we can define the infinite natural numbers only with these two axioms.
F rom 0, the next is 1, then the next is 2, then 3, ..., then n, and thenn+ 1 , ... However,
there is a counter example. Consider a set with only two numbers f0,1g. Where the
successor of 1 is defined as 0, while the successor of 0 is defined as 1. It satisfies the above
two axioms well although they are not as we expected. In order to avoid this situation,
we need the third Peano axiom.
3. 0 isn’t the successor of any natural number. Expressed as 8n2N:n′6= 0 ;
1Natural number is different from integer. W e’ll come back to the story of Kronecker in the chapter
of infinity .1.2. PEANO AXIOMS 3
Are these three axioms enough? W e can still find another counter example. Consider
the set off0,1,2g. Define the successor of 0 is 1, the successor of 1 is 2, and the successor
of 2 is 2 again. It satisfies all the three axioms so far. W e therefore need the fourth Peano
axiom.
4. Different natural numbers have different successors. In other words, if two natural
numbers have the same successor, then they are same. It can be formally expressed
as8n,m2N:n′=m′)n=m;
However, it is still not enough. W e can still find another example. F or set f0,0.5,1,1.5,2,2.5,...g.
Define 1 is the successor of 0, 2 is the successor of 1, ...; 1.5 is the successor of 0.5, 2.5 is
the successor of 1.5, ...; But 0.5 is not the successor of any other numbers. In order to
exclude such ‘unreachable’ elements, we need the last Peano axiom.
5. If some subset of natural numbers contains 0, and every element in it has a successor,
then this subset is same as the whole natural numbers. It can be expressed as
8SN: (02S^8n2S)n′2S))S=N.
Why does the fifth axiom exclude the above counter example? F or f0, 0.5, 1, 1.5,
2, 2.5, ...g, consider the subset of f0,1,2,...g. 0 belongs to it, and every element has a
successor. But it is not identical to the original set. As 1.5, 2.5, ... are not in this subset,
it does not satisfy the fifth Peano axiom. This last axiom as also known as ‘Axiom of
induction’ . It can be equally stated as the following.
5. F or any proposition of natural numbers, if it holds for 0, and when assume it holds
for some number n, we can prove it also holds for n′, then the proposition holds for
all natural numbers. (This axiom ensure the correctness of mathematical induction.)
This the complete statement of the five Peano axioms. They can build the first-order
arithmetic, also known as Peano arithmetic2.
Figure 1.3: Giuseppe Peano (1858-1932)
Giuseppe Peano was an Italian mathematician, logician, and linguist. Peano was born
and raised on a farm at Spinetta, a hamlet now belonging to Cuneo, Italy . He enrolled
at the University of T urin in 1876, graduating in 1880 with high honors, after which
the University employed him to teach calculus course. In 1887, Peano married Carola
Crosio. In 1886, he began teaching concurrently at the Royal Military Academy . F rom
2Some people use 1, but not 0 as the first natural number. The order is different from the original
works published by Peano, where the fifth axiom of induction was list as the third one.4 CHAPTER 1. NUMBERS
1880s, Peano started to study mathematical logic. He published the Peano axioms, a
formal foundation for the natural numbers. Peano started the F ormulario Project. It was
to be an “Encyclopedia of Mathematics”, containing all known formulae and theorems
of mathematical science. In 1900, the Second International Congress of Mathematicians
was held in Paris. At the conference Peano met Bertrand Russell and gave him a copy of
F ormulario. Russell was so struck by Peano’s innovative logical symbols that he left the
conference and returned home to study Peano’s text[ 4].
When Russell and Whitehead wrote Principia Mathematica , they were deeply influenced by Peano. Peano played a key role in the axiomatization of mathematics and was a
leading pioneer in the development of mathematical logic and set theory . As part of this
effort, he made key contributions to the modern rigorous and systematic treatment of the
method of mathematical induction. He spent most of his career teaching mathematics at
the University of T urin. He also wrote an international auxiliary language, Latino sine
flexione (”Latin without inflections”, later called Interlingua), which is a simplified version
of Classical Latin. Most of his books and papers are in Latino sine flexione. Although
Peano put a lot of effort to rewrite his works in the new language, few people read it.
On the other hand, his early works in F rench influnced many mathematicians, especially
to the Bourbaki group, which came out many top mathematicians like André W eil, Jean
Dieudonné, Henri Cartan, Schwartz, Serre, Grothendieck and so on.
Giuseppe Peano died on April, 20th, 1932 when he suffered a fatal heart attack.
