# (1, 3) Natural numbers and programming

1.3 Natural numbers and programming . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
1.3 Natural numbers and programming
People make amazing achievement with the modern computer systems. W e didn’t establish the axioms of computer programming before developing these results. After the
great success of computer application, then the foundation of computer science is gradually developed to be strict, formal, and mathematized. The similar thing happens several
times in our history . Calculus was developed by Newton and Leibniz independently in the
17th century , then applied to a wide range of areas, including fluid dynamics, astronomy
and so on. However, it was not formalized until W eierstrass and Cauchy developed the
foundation in the 19th century[ 4].
W e’ll emulate it. F rom the Peano axioms, define the natural numbers with computer
programs. In a computer system without familiar numbers like 0, 1, 2, ..., we can define
the natural numbers as below3:
data Nat = zero |succ Nat
A natural number is either zero, or the successor of another natural number. Symbol
‘|’ is mutual exclusive, it implicates the axiom that zero is not the successor of any natural
number. W e can further define the addition for natural numbers.
a + zero = a
a + ( succ b) = succ (a + b)
There are two rules for addition. First, any natural number adds zero gives that
number itself; second, a natural number adds to a successor of some natural number
equals to the successor of the sum of the two. In mathematic expression:
a+ 0 =a
a+b′= (a+b)′ (1.1)
Let’s use 2+3 as the example. natural number 2 is succ(succ zero), and 3 is succ(succ(succ
zero)). According to the definition of addition:
3W e use a virtual, ideal programming language in this book. Some real programs are given at the end
of each chapter for reference.1.3. NA TURAL NUMBERS AND PROGRAMMING 5
succ (succ zero ) + succ (succ (succ zero ))
=succ (succ (succ zero ) + succ (succ zero ))
=succ (succ (succ (succ zero ) + succ zero ))
=succ (succ (succ (succ (succ zero ) + zero )))
=succ (succ (succ (succ (succ zero ))))
The result is the 5th successor of zero. It’s not practical to apply succeed function
again and again for big numbers like 100. Let’s introduce a simplified notation for natural
numbern.
n=foldn (zero,succ,n ) (1.2)
It appliessucc function to zero ntimes. F unction foldn can be realized as the following.
foldn (z,f, 0) =z
foldn (z,f,n′) =f(foldn (z,f,n ))(1.3)
F unctionfoldn defines some operation on natural number. When ziszero , andfis
thesucc function, then it can apply the succeed operation multiple times to get a specific
natural number. W e can verify it with the first several numbers.
foldn( zero ,succ , 0) = zero
foldn( zero ,succ , 1) = succ (foldn( zero ,succ , 0)) = succ zero
foldn( zero ,succ , 2) = succ (foldn( zero ,succ , 1)) = succ (succ zero )
...
Multiplication for natural number can be defined on top of addition.
a . zero =zero
a . ( succ b) = a . b + a
The multiplication can be expressed in mathematic symbols as below.
a0 = 0
ab′=ab+a(1.4)
Figure 1.4: Association of addition in geometry . The areas of the above and bottom are
same.
It turns out that the associative and commutative laws for addition and multiplication
are neither axioms nor postulations. They all can be proved by Peano axioms and the
definitions. Let’s prove the associative law for addition as an example. This law states
(a+b) +c=a+ (b+c). W e firstly prove it holds when c= 0 . According to the first rule
in the add definition:
(a+b) + 0 =a+b
=a+ (b+ 0)
Then for induction, assume (a+b)+c=a+(b+c)hold, we want to prove (a+b)+c′=
a+ (b+c′).6 CHAPTER 1. NUMBERS
(a+b) +c′= (a+b+c)′2nd equation defining +, (backward)
= (a+ (b+c))′induction assumption
=a+ (b+c)′2nd equation defining +
=a+ (b+c′) 2nd equation defining +, (backward)
Hence proves the associative law for addition. However, it is a bit complex to prove
the commutative law. W e give it in the Appendix of the book.
Figure 1.5: Commutative law of addition in geometry . T urn upside down or mirror the
upper figure.
Exercise 1.2
1. Define 1 as the successor of 0, prove a1 =aholds for all natural numbers;
2. Prove the distributive law for multiplication;
3. Prove the associative and commutative laws for multiplication.
4. How to verify 3 + 147 = 150 with Peano axioms?
5. Give the geometric explanation for distributive, associative, and commutative laws
of multiplication.
