# (1, 5) Isomorphism of natural numbers

1.5 Isomorphism of natural numbers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
1.5 Isomorphism of natural numbers
W e’ve seen the examples that natural numbers can be isomorphic to its subsets, like
odd and even numbers, squares, and Fibonacci numbers. Natural numbers can also be
isomorphic to other things. One interesting example is the list in the computer programs.
Here is the definition of list.
data List A = nil | cons(A, List A)
As a data structure, a list of type A is either empty , represented as nil; or contains
two parts: one node with data of type A, and the rest sub-list. F unction cons links an
element of type A to another list10. Figure 1.8 shows a list of 6 nodes.
8After 2010, the n+k pattern matching is not supported any more in Haskell. W e can modify it as:
foldn z f n = f (foldn z f (n-1))
9One line code to produce the first 100 Fibonacci numbers:
take 100 $ map fst $ iterate ( λ(m, n)->(n, m + n)) (0, 1)
10The name cons comes from the Lisp naming convention.1.5. ISOMORPHISM OF NA TURAL NUMBERS 11
nil
Figure 1.8: Linked-list
Because every node links to the next one or nil, list is also called as ‘linked-list’ . In
the tradition of computer programs, linked-list is often defined through the record data
structure11, for example:
Node of A:
key: A
next: Node of A
W e can also understand the list as isomorphism of natural numbers. According to the
first Peano axiom, nil is corresponding to zero; Based on the second Peano axiom, for any
list, we can apply cons , to link a new element of type A to the left. W e can treat cons
corresponding to succ to the natural numbers. There are two different things. First, list
is augmented with elements of type A. List cons(1, cons(2, cons(3, nil))) and
cons(2, cons(1, cons(3, nil))) ; List cons(1, cons(4, cons(9, nil)))
andcons('a', cons('b', cons('c', nil))) are all different lists. Second, new
element is not added to the right at tail, but is added to the left on head. Different from
the intuition, the list grows to the left but not to the right.
It’s not convenient to represent long list with nested cons . W e simplify cons(1,
cons(2, cons(3, nil))) to [1, 2, 3], and use symbol ‘:’ for cons . This list can also
be written as 1:[2, 3] or 1:(2:(3:nil)). When type A is character, we use string in quote to
represent this special type of list. F or example, “hello” is the simplified form for [’h’, ’e’,
’l’, ’l’, ’o’].
Similar to add defined for natural numbers, we can define the concatenation for lists
as the following.
nil+ +y=y
cons (a,x) + +y=cons (a,x+ +y)(1.12)
There are two rules for list concatenation. First, empty list concatenates any list
produces the same list; second, when concatenate the ‘successor’ of a list to another one,
it equals to firstly concatenate the two lists, then take the successor. Compare to the add
for natural numbers, the definition of list concatenation is mirrored symmetric.
nil+ +y=ya+ 0 =a
cons (a,x) + +y=cons (a,x+ +y)a+succ (b) =succ (a+b)
Figure 1.9: The list concatenation and natural number adding are mirrored symmetric.
With the hint of symmetry , we can prove the associative law for list concatenation
through the induction axiom. T o prove (x+ +y) + +z=x+ + (y+ +z), we first prove it holds
forx=nil .
(nil+ +y) + +z=y+ +z 1st equation of + +
=nil+ + (y+ +z) 1st equation of + + (backward)
F or the induction case, assume (x+ +y) + +z=x+ + (y+ +z)holds. W e want to prove
that ((a:x) + +y) + +z= (a:x) + + (y+ +z).
11In most cases, the data stored in list have the same type. However, there is also heterogeneous list,
like the list in Lisp for example.12 CHAPTER 1. NUMBERS
((a:x) + +y) + +z= (a: (x+ +y)) + +z 2nd equation of + +
=a: ((x+ +y) + +z) 2nd equation of + +
=a: (x+ + (y+ +z)) induction assumption
= (a:x) + + (y+ +z) 2nd equation of + + (backward)
With this, we proved the list concatenation is associative. Different from the natural
numbers however, list concatenation is not commutative12. F or example [2,3,5]+ +[7,11] =
[2,3,5,7,11] , but when change the order, the result is [7,11] + + [2,3,5] = [7,11,2,3,5].
Consider the similarity to the natural numbers, we can also define the abstract folding
operation for lists. Corresponding to the abstract start value cand the abstract binary
operationh, we define the recursive scheme as below.
f(nil) =c
f(cons (a,x)) =h(a,f(x))(1.13)
As the next step, let f=foldr (c,h), then we can abstract the list folding. W e name
it asfoldr to call out the folding starts from right to left.
foldr (c,h,nil ) =c
foldr (c,h,cons (a,x)) =h(a,foldr (c,h,x ))(1.14)
W e can define varies of list manipulations with foldr . The followings are to sum and
multiply all the elements in list.
sum =foldr (0,+)
product =foldr (1,)(1.15)
W e can understand how sum behaves with examples. First is about empty list,
sum ([]) =foldr (0,+,nil) = 0 . Then the list with some elements:
sum ([1,3,5,7]) =foldr (0,+,1 : [3,5,7])
= 1 +foldr (0,+,3 : [5,7])
= 1 + (3 + foldr (0,+,5 : [7]))
= 1 + (3 + (5 + foldr (0,+,cons (7,nil))))
= 1 + (3 + (5 + (7 + foldr (0,+,nil))))
= 1 + (3 + (5 + (7 + 0)))
= 16
W e can measure the length of the list with sum . It essentially maps a list to a natural
number.
one(a) = 1
length =sumfoldr (0,one )(1.16)
Where function one is called as constant function. It always returns 1 for whatever
variables. W e can use jxj=length (x)to represent the length of a given list. The next
example shows we can use foldr to define list concatenation.
(+ +y) =foldr (y,cons ) (1.17)
It is corresponding to the (+m)operation for natural number. F urther, similar to the
multiplication of natural numbers, we can define the ‘multiplication’ for lists, concatenate
all sub-lists in a list.
concat =foldr (nil,+ +) (1.18)
12This is the reason why we avoid using symbol + for concatenation. But many programming languages
use the + sign. It causes potential issues in practice.1.5. ISOMORPHISM OF NA TURAL NUMBERS 13
When apply concat ([[1,1],[2,3,5],[8]]) , the result is [1,1,2,3,5,8]. At the end of this
section, we’ll define two important list operations with foldr , filtering and mapping13.
Filter is to compose a new list from the elements that satisfy a given predication. In
order to realize filtering, we need introduce the conditional expression14. It’s written as
(p7!f,g). When give variable x, if the predication p(x)holds, then the result is f(x),
else it’sg(x). W e also use if p(x)thenf(x)elseg(x)for conditional expression.
filter (p) =foldr (nil,(p1st7!cons, 2nd)) (1.19)
Let’s use an example to understand how this definition works. W e want to select all
even numbers from a list filter (even, [1,4,9,16,25]) . Like expansion process in sum , the
filtering expands to h(1,h(4,h(9,...))) till the right end cons (25,nil). According to the
definition of foldr , the result is cwhen the list is nil . So the next step is to compute
h(25,nil), whereh is the conditional expression. When apply even1st to the pair
(25,nil), function 1st picks 25, as it’s odd, the predication even does not hold. Based on
the conditional expression, 2nd is evaluated and gives the result nil . Then we enter the
upper level to compute h(16,nil). F unction 1st extracts the number 16, as 16 is even, the
predicateeven holds, so the conditional expression sends to cons (16,nil), which produces
the list [16] . Then we enter one more upper level to compute h(9,[16]) , the conditional
expression sends to 2nd , which again produces [16] . The computation enters to h(4,[16])
next. The conditional expression sends to cons (4,[16]) , which produces the list [4,16] .
The computation finally reach to the top level h(1,[4,16]) . The conditional expression
sends to 2nd , which produces the final result [4,16] .
The concept of mapping is to transform every element in one list to another value
through a function f, and form a new list. That is map (f,fx1,x2,...,x ng=ff(x1),f(x2),...,f (xn)g.
It can be defined with foldr as below.
map (f) =foldr (nil,h )
h(x,c) =cons (f(x),c)(1.20)
W e call the operation that applies a function to the first value in a pair as ‘ first ’, that
isfirst (f,(x,y)) = (f(x),y). W e’ll come back to it in the chapter of category theory .
Withfirst , map can be defined as map (f) =foldr (nil,consfirst (f)).
Exercise 1.4
1. What does the expression foldr (nil,cons )define?
2. Read in a sequence of digits (string of digit numbers), convert it to decimal with
foldr . How to handle hexadecimal digit and number? How to handle the decimal
point?
3. Jon Bentley gives the maximum sum of sub-vector puzzle in Programming Pearls .
F or integer listfx1,x2,...,x ng, find the range i,j , that maximizes the sum of xi+
xi+1+...+xj. Solve it with foldr .
4. The longest sub-string without repeated characters. Given a string, find the longest
sub-string without any repeated characters in it. F or example, the answer for string
“abcabcbb” is “abc” . Solve it with foldr .
13Different from one to one mapping, the map defined here is one direction only . F or example, the map
from a string to its length is one direction. The reverse map does not exist.
14Also known as McCarthy conditional form, or McCarthy formalism. It was introduced by the computer scientist, the inventor of Lisp, John McCarthy in 1960.14 CHAPTER 1. NUMBERS
