# (1, 6) F orm and structure

1.6 F orm and structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
2 Recursion 17
1.6 F orm and structure
Figure 1.10: Raphael, School of Athens (part)
W e illustrated several conclusions with geometry figures in this chapter, like the associative law, the commutative law, and the Fibonacci spiral. W e want to express the
beauty of isomorphism. Aristotle said “The chief forms of beauty are order and symmetry and definiteness, which the mathematical sciences demonstrate in a special degree. ”
(Metaphysic ) Like geometry , with Peano’s work, natural numbers can also be built on
top of the axioms. W e use the similarity of natural numbers and lists to demonstrate
the beauty of symmetry . When the Italian Renaissance artist Raphael created the world
famous fresco School of Athens , he used the same approach of isomorphism by inventing
a system of iconography . Many ancient Greece philosophers were illustrated with the
figures in Raphael’s time of Renaissance. The center figures are Plato and his student
Aristotle. Of which Plato is depicted in the image of Leonardo da Vinci; Aristotle is
in the image of Giuliano da Sangallo. They were all great artists in Renaissance. The
elder Plato is walking alongside Aristotle with his right hand figure point up, while Aristotle is stretching his hand forward. It is popularly thought that their gestures indicate
central aspects of their philosophies, for Plato, his Theory of F orms, and for Aristotle,
his empiricist views, with an emphasis on concrete particulars. Plato argues a sense of
timelessness while Aristotle looks into the physicality of life and the present realm. Below
the steps in the middle, the great philosopher Heraclitus leans the box and meditates.
He is famous for the thoughts about simple dialectics and materialism. The image of
Heraclitus is another great artist Michelangelo in Renaissance. The front left is centered
on the great mathematician Pythagoras. He is writing something. On the right side of
Pythagoras is a blond young man in a white cloak, considered to be F rancisco Maria
della Rovere. He was Ulbino’s future Grand Duke. The center of the bottom right is the
great mathematician Euclid with a compass in hand (or Archimedes in other opinion), he
is surrounded by Ptolemy , the great astronomer with the celestial sphere in hand. The
opposite is the painter Raphael’s fellow villager, the architect Bramante. The one who
wore a white hat on the right is the painter Sodom, the young man next to him with half
head and a hat on his head, is the painter, Raphael himself. This reminds us the great
musician Bach, who wrote his name B-A-C-H in his work ‘The Art of F ugue’ (Die Kunst
der F uge in German). School of Athens reflects the ancient Greece art and philosophy
with the figures in the time of Renaissance. It is the multiple levels of isomorphism ofMathematics of Programming 15
form and content, structure and thoughts. It is seen as “Raphael’s masterpiece and the
perfect embodiment of the classical spirit of the Renaissance” .
Exercise 1.5
1. In the fold definition of Fibonacci numbers, the successor is computed as (m′,n′) =
(n,m +n). It is essentially matrix multiplication:
(
m′
n′)
=(0 1
1 1)(
m
n)
Where it starts from (0,1)T. Then the Fibonacci numbers is isomorphic to natural
numbers under the matrix multiplication:
(Fn
Fn+1)
=(0 1
1 1)n(0
1)
W rite a program to compute the power of 2-order square matrix, and use it to give
then-th Fibonacci number.16 RecursionChapter 2
Recursion
GNU means GNU’s Not Unix
–Richard Stallman
Pythagoras (about 570BC
- 490BC)People learn our world with numbers. In previous chapter, we introduced Peano axioms, and things that are isomorphic to natural numbers, like the list data structure in
programming. Natural number is a fundamental tool, however, our building still need some corner stones. W e accept
the recursive definition without proof of its correctness, like
the factorial for example.
fact(0) = 1
fact(n+ 1) = (n+ 1) fact(n)
Why does recursion work? What is the theory of recursion? Could we formally express recursion? W e’ll explore
these questions in this chapter.
