# (2, 2, 1) The Euclid’s Elements

2.2.1 The Euclid’s Elements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
2.2.1 The Euclid’s Elements
Euclid, About 300BCEuclid of Alexandria is the most prominent ancient
Greek mathematician, often referred as “father of geometry” . His Elements is one of the most influential works
in the history . However, little is known of Euclid’s life
except that he taught at Alexandria in Egypt. The year
and place of his birth and death are unknown. Proclus, the last major Greek philosopher who lived around
450AD introduced Euclid briefly in his Commentary on
the Elements . He mentioned an interesting story about
Euclid. When Ptolemy I of Alexandria (king of Egypt
323BC - 283BC) grew frustrated at the degree of effort
required to master geometry via Eculid’s Elements , he
asked if there was a shorter path, Euclid replied there
is no royal road to geometry . This becomes the learning maxim of eternal. Another story told by Stobaeus
said someone who had begun to learn geometry with
Euclid, when he had learnt the first theorem, asked Euclid “What shall I get by learning these things?” Euclid said “Give him three pence since
he must make gain out of what he learns” . Euclid disagreed with the narrow practical
6The Euclidean algorithm was also developed independently in ancient India and China. The Indian
mathematician Aryabhata used this method to solve the Diophantine equation around the end of the 5th
centry . The Euclidean algorithm was treated as a special case of the Chinese remainder theorem in Sunzi
Suanjing . Qin Jiushao gave the detailed algorithm in his Mathematical T reatise in Nine Sections (ඔ඀
ࣴᅣ ) in 1247.
7The same algorithm for integers is also defined as propostion 1, book VII. However, the algorithm
for segements covers the integer case.2.2. THE EUCLIDEAN ALGORITHM 21
view of learning[ 11].
F rom ancient time to the late 19th century , people considered the Elements as a perfect
example of correct reasoning. Although many of the results in Elements originated with
earlier mathematicians, one of Euclid’s accomplishments was to present them in a single,
logically coherent framework, making it easy to use and easy to reference, including a
system of rigorous mathematical proofs that remains the basis of mathematics 23 centuries
later. More than a thousand editions have been published, making it one of the most
popular books after the Bible. Even today , Elements is still widely taught in school8as
one of the basic way to train logic reasoning[ 8].
