# (2, 6) More recursive structures

2.6 More recursive structures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
2.6 More recursive structures
W e’ve completely defined the recursive functions and the basic pair data structures on
top of pure mathematics. W e can next define complex data structures like the binary
trees.
data Tree A = nil | node (Tree A, A, Tree A)
This definition says, a binary tree of type A is either empty , or a branch node with
three parts: two sub-trees of type A, together with an element of type A. W e often call
the two sub-trees as the left and right sub-trees. A is the type parameter, like natural
numbers for example. node (nil,0,node (nil,1,nil)) is a binary tree of natural numbers.
W e can define the abstract fold operation foldt for binary trees.
foldt (f,g,c,nil ) =c
foldt (f,g,c,node (l,x,r )) =g(foldt (f,g,c,l ),f(x),foldt (f,g,c,r ))(2.11)
If functionfmaps variable of type A to B, we write its type as f:A!B. The Curried
functionfoldt (f,g,c )has type of foldt (f,g,c ) :Tree A!B, where the type of cisB;
the type of gisg: (BBB)!B, written in Curried form is g:B!B!B!B.
W e can define the map function mapt for binary trees with the foldt function.
mapt (f) =foldt (f,node,nil ) (2.12)
With the folding function, we can count the number of elements in a tree:
sizet =foldt (one,sum, 0) (2.13)
Where,one(x) = 1 is a constant function, it always returns 1 for any parameters.
sum is a ternary summation function defined as sum (a,b,c ) =a+b+c.
Using the list defined in chapter 1, we can expand the binary trees to multi-trees as
below.
data MTree A = nil | node (A, List (MTree A))
A multi-tree of type A is either empty , or a composite node, which contains an element
of type A, together with multiple sub-trees. The sub-trees are hold in a list. The abstract
tree folding operation recursively calls the list folding operation.
foldm (f,g,c,nil ) =c
foldm (f,g,c,node (x,ts)) =foldr (g(f(x),c),h,ts )
h(t,z) =foldm (f,g,z,t )(2.14)40 CHAPTER 2. RECURSION
Exercise 2.3
1. Define the abstract mapt for binary trees without of using foldt .
2. Define a function depth , which counts for the maximum depth of a binary tree.
3. Someone thought the abstract fold operation for binary tree foldt , should be defined as the following:
foldt (f,g,c,nil ) =c
foldt (f,g,c,node (l,x,r )) =foldt (f,g,g (foldt (f,g,c,l ),f(x)),r)
That is to say g: (BB)!B is a binary operation like add. Can we use this
foldt to definemapt ?
4. The binary search tree (BST) is a special tree that the type A is comparable.
F or any none empty node (l,k,r ), all elements in the left sub-tree lare less than
k, and all elements in the right sub-tree rare greater than k. Define function
insert (x,t) : (ATree A )!Tree A that inserts an element into the tree.
5. Can we define the mapping operation for multi-trees with folding? If not, how
should we modify the folding operation?
