# (2, 7) The recursive pattern and structure

2.7 The recursive pattern and structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40
2.7 The recursive pattern and structure
Recursion exists both in the ancient Euclidean algorithm and in modern computer systems. The fascinating recursive pattern and structure also appear in various of arts in
human civilizations. F or example in Islamic mosaic arts, shown in figure 2.16 .
Figure 2.16: Zellige terracotta tiles in Marrakech (a city of the Kingdom of Morocco)
W e can see the polygon patterns in the mosaic recursively contain smaller polygons.
It demonstrates the beauty of recursive geometric patterns through the colorful tiles. The
small patterns form big stripes, which brings the varies of effects. Figure 2.17 is a sketch of
the famous Renaissance artist Leonardo da Vinci. It’s also a recursive pattern. Using the
same radius, he drew six interlaced circles along the centered one. They form a six-lobed
snowflake style figure. And they recursively form the same pattern in a bigger scope.
The right figure shows a pile of Chinese hand-made katydid cages. It demonstrated the
similar recursive pattern. The mesh of the cage is hexagonal. While the overall shape of
the cage is also hexagonal when viewed from the axial direction.
Not only in art, recursion also appears in music. F or example, the polyphonic music
canon and fugue can have recursive musical texture. Canon is a contrapuntal music that2.7. THE RECURSIVE P A TTERN AND STRUCTURE 41
(a) A sketch of Leonardo da
Vinci
(b) Chinese katydid cages
Figure 2.17: The recursive pattern in art and artifact.
employs a melody with one or more imitations played after a given duration. The initial
melody is called the leader, while the imitative melody , which is played in a different
voice, is called the follower. The follower must imitate the leader, either as an exact
replication of its rhythms and intervals or some transformation thereof. The weaving of
the leader and followers, results in a continuous effect. Each part imitates the theme but
contains various changes, such as raising or lowering the pitch, retrograde overlapping,
faster (diminution) or slowing (augmentation), melody reflection, and so on.
Figure 2.18: Minuet of Haydn’s String Quartet in D Minor, Op. 76, No. 2
A fugue is like a canon, in that it is usually based on one theme which gets played
in different voices and different keys, and occasionally at different speeds or upside down
or backwards. However, the notion of fugue is much less rigid than that of canon, and
consequently it allows for more emotional and artistic expression. The telltale sign of a
fugue is the way it begins: with a single voice singing its theme. When it is done, then
a second voice enters, either five scale-notes up, or four down. Meanwhile the first voice
goes on, singing the “countersubject”: a secondary theme, chosen to provide rhythmic,
harmonic, and melodic contrasts to the subject. Each of the voices enters in turn, singing
the theme, often to the accompaniment of the countersubject in some other voice, with
the remaining voices doing whatever fanciful things entered the composer’s mind. When
all the voices have “arrived”, then there are no rules. There are, to be sure, standard kinds
of things to do-but not so standard that one can merely compose a fugue by formula. The
two fugues in J.S. Bach’s Musical Offering are outstanding examples of fugues that could
never have been ”composed by formula” . There is something much deeper in them than42 CHAPTER 2. RECURSION
Figure 2.19: M.C. Escher, Drawing Hands, 1948
mere fugality[ 5].
Not only finite recursion, we can also find the infinite recursion in arts. Figure 2.19 ,
Drawing Hands is a lithograph by the Dutch artist M. C. Escher first printed in January
1948. T wo hands mutual recursively are drawing each other. It an example of infinite
recursion. The upper hand is using a pencil drawing the lower hand, while the lower
hand, at the same time, is drawing the upper hand. The recursion is embedded loop by
loop endlessly .
The perfect combination of mathematical recursion and art is fractal. Kock snowflake
is a famous fractal curve, which can be generated by infinite recursion rules: F or every
section, divided it into 3 equal parts, draw a equilateral triangle on top of the middle
section, then erase the bottom side of the triangle. Figure 2.20 shows the Kock snowflake
result after recursively applying this rule three times on a equilateral triangle. Another
famous fractal pattern is called Sierpinski triangle. The generation rule is to connect
all the three middle points of the side in a triangle recursively . Below figure shows the
Sierpinski triangle after recursively applying the rules four times.
(a) Recursive generate rules for Kock
snowflake
(b) Sierpinski triangle
Figure 2.20: Recursive generated fractal patterns.
W e show another two fractal patterns as the close of this chapter. One is the fractal
in human mind, Julia set; the other is a fractal in nature.
