# (3, 1, 4) Permutation group

3.1.4 Permutation group . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 63
3.1.4 Permutation group
In this section, we introduce permutation group. It is the permutation group that Galois
used to determine if a given equation is radical solvable. Permutation group is a special
transformation group. Let’s first define what is permutation. A permutation is a one to
one transformation for a finite set. The permutations of a finite set form a permutation
group under the composite operation. As the name indicates, it permutes elements in
the set. F urther, the group of al l permutations of a set with nelements is the symmetric
group of degreen, denoted as Sn.
W e know from the permutation theory learned in high school, there are n!different
permutations for nelements. Therefore, the symmetric group of degree nhas the order
ofn!. A permutation maps element aiin the set to aki, wherei= 1,2,...,n . The
permutation can be determined by npairs of (1,k1),(2,k2),...,(n,kn). W e can express
the permutation as:
(1 2... n
k1k2... k n)
F or example
(1 2 3 4 5
2 5 4 3 1)
It represents a permutation. Since the first row is always in the form 1,2,...,n , we
can further simplify the permutation to (2,5,4,3,1). This permutation moves the 2nd
element to the 1st position; moves the 5th element to the 2nd position and so on. W e
can use this notation to list all permutations for a set with 3 elements. It is group S3:
(1,2,3),(1,3,2),(2,1,3),(2,3,1),(3,1,2),(3,2,1)
When do the multiplication, which is composition essentially , we can determine the
element for every position in this way: for the i-th position, first check what the new
position should be in the first permutation, for example j; then check where jshould be
mapped to in the second permutation, for example k. Therefore, the final position as
the result of the multiplication is k. Let’s pick two elements from S3to examine if it is
abelian:
(1,3,2)(2,1,3) = (2,3,1)
(2,1,3)(1,3,2) = (3,1,2)
They are different results. S3is not abelian. Actually , it is the smallest finite none
abelian group. A finite none abelian group contains at least 6 elements. Observe the
permutation for 5 elements (2,3,1,4,5), only the first three ones change, while the rest
two keep same. The changes for the first three elements have a pattern: 2!1,3!2,
1!3, which is cyclic.
With this pattern, we can simplify the permutation notation from (2,3,1,4,5) to
(2 3 1) . Note there is no comma between elements, and we treat (1 2 3) ,(2 3 1) ,
and (3 1 2) represent the same 3-cyclic permutation15. F ormally , we define k-cyclic
permutation (ij1ij2...ijk). It maps the next element to its previous position, and send the
first element to the last to form the cycle:
ij2!ij1,ij3!ij2,...,i j1!ijk
15There are people use (231) notation without any spaces as deliminator. However, when there are over
10 elements, it causes ambiguity . As it can also be (23 1) .64 CHAPTER 3. SYMMETR Y
1 2 3
2 3 1
Figure 3.13: Permutation (2 3 1) is cyclic
The elements in k-cyclic permutation are not necessary adjacent, for example (3 9 4) ,
nor in a fixed order, for example (2 4 1 3) . If there are only two element in the circle,
like(i j), we call it transposition (swap). Identity transformation is the special case, for
example (1,2,3,4,5), we denote it as ϵ= (1) , and let:
ϵ= (1) = (2) = ...= (n)
Observe the permutation (2,1,4,5,3), it contains two cycles, one is the 2-cyclic permutation (1 2) , the other is 3-cyclic permutation (3 4 5) . W e can use the permutation
multiplication to express this fact:
(2,1,4,5,3) = (1 2)(3 4 5)
In fact, every permutation πfornelements can be expressed with some mutual exclusive (without any common numbers) cyclic permutations. This approach brings us
a useful advantage, although permutations are not commutative in common case, as
k-cyclic permutations don’t share same numbers, they are commutative. F or example
(1 2)(3 4 5) = (3 4 5)(1 2) .
The following list express all the permutations in S3in this way:
(1),(1 2),(1 3),(2 3),(1 2 3),(1 3 2)
Given a permutation (k1,k2,...,k n), how to express it as the product of cyclic forms?
W e can do it with such prescription. F rom left to right compare every position with the
number in the permutation, if kiequalsi, it means the element has already in the right
position; otherwise open a pair of parentheses, write down the number in position kiin
the parentheses, let say it is kj, then check the position kjwithj, if they are not equal,
write in the parentheses. Repeat this step till we found some element form a cycle to
the starting point. At this time point, we close the parentheses of this cycle. After that,
we go on checking from left to right till all the elements are processed ([ 25], pp27). If
for all positions, we have kiequals toi, then we write down (1) to present the identity
permutation. It very convenient to realize this process in programming. Below is the
algorithm for it with example source code in a real programming language.
function k-cycles (π)
r []
fori 1tojπjdo
p []
whilei6=π[i]do
p π[i] :p
Exchangeπ[i]$π[π[i]]
ifp6= [] then
r r: (π[i] :reverse (p))3.1. GROUP 65
ifr6= [] then
return r
else
return [[1]] ▷Identity permutation
Express any permutation as product of k-cycle notation:
def kcycles(a):
r = []
n = len(a)
for iin range (n):
p = []
while i + 1 != a[i]:
p.append(a[i])
j = a[i] - 1
a[i], a[j] = a[j], a[i]
ifp != []:
r.append([a[i]] + p)
return rifr != [] else [[1]]
F rom the theorem in previous section, we further have:
Theorem 3.1.6. Every finite group is isomorphic to a permutation group.
F or any finite group, like the solutions of a equation, we can study it with the permutation group, as it is easy to manipulate. This is exactly how Galois solve the problem to
determine if the equation is radical solvable.
Exercise 3.4
1. List all the elements in S4.
2. Express all the elements in S3as the product of cyclic forms.
3. W rite a program to convert the product of k-cycles back to permutation.
