# (3, 1, 8) Lagrange’s theorem

3.1.8 Lagrange’s theorem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 74
3.1.8 Lagrange’s theorem
Lagrange’s theorem greatly demonstrates the power of abstract algebra. W e can reveal
the inner pattern of the abstract structure even without knowing any concrete meanings
of the group elements or their operations.
Stamp of Joseph-Louise LagrangeJoseph-Louise Lagrange, was an mathematics,
physics, and astronomer. He was born on January
25, 1736 in T urin, Italy . Lagrange was of Italian
and F rench descent. His paternal great-grandfather
was a F rench army oﬀicer who had moved to T urin,
and married an Italian. His father, who had charge
of the king’s military chest and was T reasurer of the
Oﬀice of Public W orks and F ortifications in T urin.
But before Lagrange grew up he had lost most of
his property in speculations. A career as a lawyer
was planned out for Lagrange by his father, and certainly Lagrange seemed to have accepted this willingly . He later claimed: “If I had been rich, I probably would not have devoted myself to mathematics. ” Lagrange studied at the University of T urin.
At first he had no great enthusiasm for mathematics, finding Greek geometry rather dull.
It was not until he was seventeen that he showed
any taste for mathematics ⚶his interest in mathematics being first excited by a paper by Edmond Halley which he came across by accident.
That paper introduced about the new calculus invented by Newton. Alone and unaided
he threw himself into mathematical studies.
Starting from 1754, he worked on the problem of tautochrone, discovering a method of
maximising and minimising functionals in a way similar to finding extrema of functions.
Lagrange wrote several letters to Leonhard Euler between 1754 and 1756 describing his
results. His work made him one of the founders of the calculus of variations. Euler was
very impressed with Lagrange’s results. As an accomplished mathematician, Lagrange
was appointed to be an mathematics assistant professor at the Royal Military Academy
of the Theory and Practice of Artillery in 1755. Already in 1756, Euler and Maupertuis,
seeing Lagrange’s mathematical talent, tried to persuade him to come to Berlin, but
Lagrange had no such intention and shyly refused the offer.
In 1766, king F rederick of Prussia wrote to Lagrange expressing the wish of “the
greatest king in Europe” to have “the greatest mathematician in Europe” resident at his
court. Lagrange was finally persuaded and he spent the next twenty years in Prussia,3.1. GROUP 75
where he produced not only the long series of papers published in the Berlin and T urin
transactions, but also his monumental work, the Mécanique analytique .
Lagrange was a favourite of the king, who used frequently to discourse to him on the
advantages of perfect regularity of life. The lesson went home, and thenceforth Lagrange
studied his mind and body as though they were machines, and found by experiment the
exact amount of work which he was able to do without breaking down. Every night he
set himself a definite task for the next day , and on completing any branch of a subject he
wrote a short analysis to see what points in the demonstrations or in the subject-matter
were capable of improvement. He always thought out the subject of his papers before he
began to compose them, and usually wrote them straight off without a single erasure or
correction.
Nonetheless, during his years in Berlin, Lagrange’s health was rather poor on many
occasions, and that of his wife Vittoria was even worse. She died in 1783 after years of
illness and Lagrange was very depressed.
In 1786, following F rederick’s death, Lagrange accepted the offer of Louis XVI to move
to Paris. In F rance he was received with every mark of distinction and special apartments
in the Louvre were prepared for his reception, and he became a member of the F rench
Academy of Sciences. It was about the same time, 1792, that the unaccountable sadness of
his life and his timidity moved the compassion of 24-year-old Renée-F rançoise-Adélaïde Le
Monnier, daughter of his friend, the astronomer Pierre Charles Le Monnier. She insisted
on marrying him, and proved a devoted wife to whom he became warmly attached.
In September 1793, the F rench revolution broke out. Under intervention of Antoine
Lavoisier (known as the father of modern chemistry , who recognized and named oxygen
and hydrogen), who himself was by then already thrown out of the Academy along with
many other scholars, Lagrange was specifically exempted by name in the decree of October
1793 that ordered all foreigners to leave F rance. On May 4, 1794, Lavoisier, who had saved
Lagrange from arrest, and 27 other tax farmers were arrested and sentenced to death and
guillotined on the afternoon after the trial. According to a story , the appeal to spare
Lavoisier’s life so that he could continue his experiments was cut short by the judge, J.
B. Coﬀinhal: “The Republic has no need of scientists or chemists; the course of justice
cannot be delayed. ” . Lagrange said on the death of Lavoisier on May 8: “It took only
a moment to cause this head to fall and a hundred years will not suﬀice to produce its
like. ”[ 26]
After Coup of Brumaire 18, 1799, Napoleon attained the power of F rance. He warmly
encouraged science and mathematics studies in F rance, and was a liberal benefactor of
them. He loaded Lagrange with honors and distinctions, appointed Lagrange as senator.
In 1808, Napoleon made Lagrange a Grand Oﬀicer of the Legion of Honour and a Count
of the Empire. Then honoured him with the Grand Croix of the Ordre of the Reunion
on April 3, 1813. A week after, Lagrange died on April 10 at the age of 77. The
funeral operation was pronounced by Laplace, represented the House of Lords, and Dean
Lacépède represented the F rench Academy . The commemorative events were held in
Italian universities.
Lagrange was the great mathematician and scientist in the 18 to 19 Century . He made
significant contributions to the fields of analysis, number theory , and both classical and
celestial mechanics. Napoleon said “Lagrange is the lofty pyramid of the mathematical
science” . But above all his contribution, he is best known for his work on mechanics, where
he transformed Newtonian mechanics into a branch of analysis, Lagrangian mechanics as
it is now called, and presented the so-called mechanical ”principles” as simple results of
the variational calculus.
Lagrange made important progress in solving algebraic equations of any degree in the
first decades in Berlin. He introduced a concept called Lagrange resolvents. The significance of this method is that it exhibits the already known formulas for solving equations76 CHAPTER 3. SYMMETR Y
of second, third, and fourth degrees as manifestations of a single principle. He failed to
give a general formula for solutions of an equation of degree five and higher, because the
auxiliary equation involved had higher degree than the original one. Nevertheless, Lagrange’s idea already implied the concept of permutation group. The permutations made
the resolvent invariant form a subgroup, and the order of the subgroup is the factor of
the original permutation group. This is exactly the famous Lagrange’s theorem in group
theory . Lagrange is a pioneer of group theory . His thoughts were adopted and developed
later by Abel and Galois, and was foundational in Galois theory .
Let us first introduce a lemma before Lagrange’s theorem.
Lemma 3.1.14. F or a subgroup H, there exists one to one mapping between H and every
right cosetHa .
As the left and right cosets are symmetric, this lemma applies to left cosets as well.
T o prove it, we can build a map f:h!ha . It is one to one mapping from the subgroup
to right cosets because:
1. F or every element hinH, there exists unique image ha ;
2. F or every element ha inHa , it is the image of hin subgroup H;
3. F or anyh1a=h2a, the equation h1=h2holds.
F rom the existence of this one to one mapping, we know that for finite group G,
the number of elements for any coset must equal to the order of the subgroup H. And
according to the partition nature, every element in the group must be in some coset.
Therefore, we have the insight between the subgroup H and the finite group G through
cosets:
Theorem 3.1.15. Lagrange’s theorem : F or any finite group G, the order (number of
elements) of every subgroup H ofG divides the order of G.
Proof. First, we know that G can be fully partitioned by the cosets of H; F rom the
equivalence relation defined for coset, we know there is no overlap among them. If element
cbelongs to both Ha andHb , thenca, andcb, therefore, ab. Equation Ha=Hb
holds. And with the one to one mapping between the subgroup H and cosets, we know
the order of every coset equals to the order of H, which isjHj=n. Given the number of
cosets ism (which equals to the index of H), we finally get the result:
jGj=mn
Note that there is a conversed question to Lagrange’s theorem, whether every divisor
of the order of a group is the order of some subgroup? This does not hold in general.
Later we’ll see such negative example in figure 3.32 (c). The order of alternative group
A4is 12, but it has no subgroup of order 6. W e can deduce many interesting results from
Lagrange’s theorem.
Corollary 3.1.16. IfG is a finite group, the order of every element ais a divisor of the
order ofG.
This is because agenerates a subgroup of order n, thereforendividesjGj.
Corollary 3.1.17. IfG has prime order, then G is cyclic.
This is because for every element aexcludes the identity element, the subgroup generated byahas the same order as G. Therefore, ais the generator of G, i.e.G= (a).3.1. GROUP 77
Corollary 3.1.18. F or every element ain a finite group G, equationa|G|=eholds.
This is because the order nofadividesG, letjGj=nk , we have:
a|G|=ank= (an)k=ek=e
Lagrange’s theorem in group theory can be used to prove the F ermat’s little theorem
in number theory . The theorem is named after Pierre de F ermat, who found it in 1636.
In a letter he wrote to a friend17in October 18, 1640, F ermat stated this theorem first. It
is called the “little theorem” to distinguish it from F ermat’s last theorem. Euler provided
the first published proof in 1736. But Leibniz had given virtually the same proof in an
unpublished manuscript from sometime before 1683.
Theorem 3.1.19. F ermat’s little theorem : Ifpis prime, for any integer athat
0<a<p , thenpdividesap−1 1.
Proof. Consider the multiplicative integer group modulo p. The group elements are all
none zero residues modulo p. Aspis prime, therefore the group elements are 1, 2, ...,
p 1. The identity element e= 1 . The order of the group is thus p 1. According to the
corollary 3.1.18 of Lagrange’s theorem, we have:
ap−1=e
Since the identity element is 1, this equation can be written as:
ap−11 modp
Therefore,pdividesap−1 1.
Compare to this method, the way to prove F ermat’s little theorem in elementary
theory of number is much more complex (for example, section 5.2 - 5.4 in [ 10]). Here we
give another interesting combinatorial method called proof by counting necklace[ 27].
Proof. Consider there are pearls in adifferent colors. we are going to make strings of
lengthp, wherepis prime. Obviously there are total apdifferent strings, because every
pearl can be chosen among acolors, and we need make ptimes selection.
F or example there are pearls in two different colors: A red, andB green. When make
strings containing 5 pearls, that is a= 2,p= 5 , there are total 25= 32 different strings:
AAAAA, AAAAB, AAABA, ..., BBBBA, BBBBB.
Corresponding to
red-red-red-red-red,
red-red-red-red-green,
red-red-red-green-red,
...,
green-green-green-green-red,
green-green-green-green-green.
W e are going to prove that, among these apstrings, if remove astrings that are all in
the same color (in the above example, they are strings of AAAAA andBBBBB ), the rest
ap astrings can be divided in several groups. Each group has exactly pstrings, thus p
dividesap a.
If we link the head and tail for every pearl string to make a necklace, some different
strings will become the same necklace. When a string can transform to the other by
rotation, the two strings must form the same necklace. The following 5 strings form the
same necklace for example:
17F riend and confidant, F rench mathematician F rénicle de Bessy .78 CHAPTER 3. SYMMETR Y
AAAAB, AAABA, AABAA, ABAAA, BAAAA.
(a) A necklace in 3 colors represents 7 different strings: ABCBAAC ,BCBAACA ,CBAACAB ,
BAACABC ,AACABCB ,ACABCBA ,CABCBAA
(b) The necklace in same color only represent one string: AAAAAAA
Figure 3.20: Partition strings through necklace
By this means, the 32 pearl strings in above example, can be partitioned into 5 necklaces in different colors and 2 necklaces in the same color:
[AAABB, AABBA, ABBAA, BBAAA, BAAAB];
[AABAB, ABABA, BABAA, ABAAB, BAABA];
[AABBB, ABBBA, BBBAA, BBAAB, BAABB];
[ABABB, BABBA, ABBAB, BBABA, BABAB];
[ABBBB, BBBBA, BBBAB, BBABB, BABBB];
[AAAAA];
[BBBBB].
How many strings can a necklace represent? If a string S can be split into several
same sub-string T, whileT can’t be split into sub-string any more, then the necklace
SrepresentsjTjdifferent strings, where jTjis the length of sub-string T. F or example,
stringS=ABBABBABBABB can be split into sub-string T=ABB , while ABB can’t be split
any more. If we rotate a pearl per time, there are total 3 different results:
ABBABBABBABB,
BBABBABBABBA,
BABBABBABBAB.
There are not any other different strings besides these 3. Since the length of ABB is
3, further rotation must give the same result. Basically , there are two types for all the ap
pearl strings. One contains astrings in same color; the rest are strings in different colors.
However, as the length of the string pis prime, it cannot be generated by duplicating
sub-strings. Therefore, every necklace in different colors, represents pdifferent strings.
There are total ap astrings in different colors. They can be partitioned into groups by
the necklaces. Each group contains exactly pstrings all can be represented with the same
necklace. It tells us pmust divide ap a=a(ap−1 1). Sinceaandpare coprime, hence
pdividesap−1 1.
The proof by counting necklaces might be the most straightforward method people
developed. It need little mathematical knowledge. The key idea is two different counting
methods must give the same result.3.1. GROUP 79
Pierre de F ermat, 1601-1665It took 100 years from the born of F ermat’s little theorem to Euler’s proof. It is not rare, but a typical F ermat style. F ermat’s last theorem stimulated many talent mathematicians. It took 358 years till British mathematician Andrew Wiles solved it in 1995 successfully .
The main tools Wiles used include elliptic curves, modularity theory , and Galois representations[ 12]. These
conjectures left by F ermat are a rich mathematical treasure.
Pierre de F ermat was a F rench mathematician, born
about August 1601. His father was a wealthy leather
merchant. He became a lawyer at the Parlement of
T oulouse F rench after grown up. In 1630, he bought
the oﬀice of a councillor at the Parlement of T oulouse,
one of the High Courts of Judicature in F rance, and was
sworn in by the Grand Chambre in May 1631. He held
this oﬀice for the rest of his life. F ermat thereby became
entitled to change his name from Pierre F ermat to Pierre de F ermat. He was fluent in
six languages. F ermat studied mathematics in his spare time. But the mathematical
achievements made by F ermat were the peak of his time. F ermat’s pioneering work in
analytic geometry was circulated in manuscript form in 1636. It was based on results he
achieved in 162918. T ogether with René Descartes, F ermat was one of the two leading
mathematicians of the first half of the 17th Century developed analytic geometry .
F ermat and Blaise Pascal laid the foundation for the theory of probability through
their correspondence in 1654. F rom this brief but productive collaboration on the problem
of points, they are now regarded as joint founders of probability theory . F ermat is credited
with carrying out the first ever rigorous probability calculation.
In physics, F ermat refined the ancient Greek result about light and generalized to
“light travels between two given points along the path of shortest time” now known as
the principle of least time. F or this, F ermat is recognized as a key figure in the historical
development of the fundamental principle of least action in physics. The terms F ermat’s
principle and F ermat functional were named in recognition of this role. F ermat also
contributed to the early development of calculus.
But F ermat’s crowning achievement was in the theory of numbers. F ermat was inspired
by the Diophantus’s great work Arithmetica in ancient Greek. It was translated into Latin
and published in F rance in 1621 by Claude Bachet. F ermat bought this book in Paris,
and was deeply attracted by the puzzles in theory of numbers. One special feature of
this edition was there were wide margin left in pages, it turned to be F ermat’s ‘note
book’ when reading it. During the study of Diophantus’ problems and answers, F ermat
often got inspired to consider wider and deeper problems, then wrote his thoughts and
comments in the margin.
F ermat published nearly nothing in his lifetime, although it is unbelievable from the
view point of today . It was common in F ermat’s time, that sometimes he wrote mails to his
scholar friends about his findings. Some of the most striking of his results were found after
his death on loose sheets of paper or written in the margins of works which he had read
and annotated, and are unaccompanied by any proof. He was constitutionally modest
and retiring, and does not seem to have intended his papers to be published. F ermat
was totally driven by the strong curiousity to explore the mathematical mysteries. It’s
18The 8 pages paper, Introduction to Plane and Solid Loci was completed in 1630, but it was published
posthumously in 1679, which was 14 years after F ermat’s death.80 CHAPTER 3. SYMMETR Y
purely because he treated mathematics study as a hobby . When he found the result
that had never been touched, F ermat was truly exciting and self-satisfied. It was not
significant to him to publish the result and get recognition[ 12]. Interestingly , this silent
genius sometimes liked to tease people. He often challenged other mathematicians in
mails by asking them to prove his discoveries.
The 1670 edition of the Arithmetica of Diophantus , with
F ermat’s annotation.When F ermat died in Jan, 1665, his research results
were scattered here and there. His son Clément-Samuel
F ermat spent 5 years to collect F ermat’s mails and notes,
then produced a special edition of Arithmetica contained
his father’s achievement. On the cover page, it printed
“augmented with F ermat’s commentary” . This edition includes 48 comments by F ermat. In 1679, Samuel collected
and published the second volume of F ermat’s work. His
research results were finally circulated, which greatly enriched the mathematics in the 17th Century , and impact
the development of mathematics later.
Before F ermat, the theory of numbers was basically a
collection of problems. It was F ermat who first systematically studied the theory of numbers. He proposed a large
number of theorems, and introduced generalized methods
and principles, thus brought the theory of numbers to the
modern development. It can be said that it was F ermat’s
systematic work that the theory of numbers really began
to become a branch of mathematics. With his gift for
number relations and his ability to find proofs for many
of his theorems, F ermat essentially created the modern
theory of numbers. He was called the ”father of modern
number theory . ” Before Gauss’s Arithmetic Research , the development of number theory
was originally driven by F ermat.
However, for many propositions conjectured, F ermat only provided some key part,
or even without any proof. Some of them were found wrong19. Before given the strict
mathematical proof, these propositions could only be called conjecture. Most of them
were later solved by Euler. What’s more, Euler greatly developed the theory of numbers
on top of F ermat’s work.
The Euler theorem in theory of numbers, is more generic than F ermat’s little theorem.
Euler did not satisfied after successfully proved F ermat’s little theorem. What if pis not
prime? After carefully studied the general condition that covered composite numbers,
Eular found and proved the following theorem.
Theorem 3.1.20. Euler theorem : If 0<a<n ,aandnare coprime, then ndivides
aϕ(n) 1.
Where ϕ(n)is Euler function20. It is defined as the number of all positive integers
that less than n, and coprime to n.
ϕ(n) =jfij0<i<n andgcd(i,n) = 1gj
19F or example F ermat number, named after F ermat who first studied them in 1640, is a positive
number of the form 22n+ 1 . F ermat claimed all such numbers are primes. It is true when n is 0, 1,
2, 3, 4. The corresponding numbers are 3, 5, 17, 257, 65537. However, in 1732 Euler calculated that
225+ 1 = 641 6700417 , is not a prime number. As of 2017, people have found 243 negative examples,
without finding the 6th F ermat prime number. It is still a unsolved conjecture whether there are any
other F ermat primes.
20Also know as Euler totient function, or Euler ϕ(n)function.3.1. GROUP 81
Euler proved this theorem with the method in elementary theory of numbers. There
is a elegant proof by using Lagrange’s theorem in group theory .
Proof. Consider the none zero residues modulo n. W e pick out all the mutually inverse
residues under the multiplication modulo n. They form a multiplicative group modulo n.
F rom the definition of Euler ϕ function, the value of ϕ(n)is the number of all positive
integers that less than nand coprime to n. While these positive numbers are exactly the
elements of the multiplicative group. Thus the order of this group is ϕ(n). F rom the
corollary 3.1.18 of Lagrange’s theorem, we have:
aϕ(n)=e
Therefore,aϕ(n)1 modn, which immediately gives the result, ndividesaϕ(n) 
1.
Let us see an example. Below is the multiplication table for all the none zero residues
modulo 10. W e can locate the identity element 1, and mark the cells underline. Then
from that cell, along with the row and column, we can find two numbers, marked in bold.
Their modulo product is 1, and both are coprime to 10. On the other hand, for every
residue number that is not coprime to 10, the row and column where it is in also contain
0. But 0 is not group element. W e can see that all the residues that are coprime to 10
are exactly the group elements 1, 3, 7, 9.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9
1 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 8
2 2 4 6 8 0 2 4 6 8
3 3 6 9 2 5 8 1 4 7
4 4 8 2 6 0 4 8 2 6
5 5 0 5 0 5 0 5 0 5
6 6 2 8 4 0 6 2 8 4
7 7 4 1 8 5 2 9 6 3
8 8 6 4 2 0 8 6 4 2
9 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
Given integer n, how to evaluate Euler function? As any integer greater than 1 can
be factored as power of prime numbers, let us first see how to evaluate ϕ(pm)for the
m power of prime p. W e are going to count how many numbers from 1 to pm 1are
coprime to pm. W e can easily do this by removing the multiples of p. These numbers are
p,2p,3p,...,pm p. Divide them by p, gives the nature number sequence 1,2,3,...,pm−1 1.
W e immediately know there are pm−1 1numbers. On top of this, we deduce the value
of Euler function for the power of prime as:
ϕ(pm) = (pm 1) (pm−1 1)
=pm pm−1
=pm(1 1
p)
W e next consider number in form of n=puqv, which is product of power of different
prime numbers. W e need first remove all multiples of p, then remove all multiples of
q. But there are numbers that are the multiples of both pandq. They are removed82 CHAPTER 3. SYMMETR Y
twice. W e need add these multiples of pq back (Principle of inclusion and exclusion in
combinatorics). Thus we have:
ϕ(puqv) = (n 1) (n
p 1) (n
q 1) + (n
pq 1)
=n(1 1
p)(1 1
q)
=pu(1 1
p)qv(1 1
q)
=ϕ(pu)ϕ(qv)
Particularly when both uandvare 1, we have ϕ(pq) =ϕ(p)ϕ(q). W e can expand this
result to multiple powers of prime numbers. Given n=pk1
1,pk2
2...pkmm , the Euler function
can be evaluated as:
ϕ(n) =n(1 1
p1)(1 1
p2)...(1 1
pm)
=ϕ(pk1
1)ϕ(pk2
2)...ϕ(pkm
m)
W e can develop the fast evaluation algorithm from this result. W e leave this as an
exercise in this chapter.
Leonhard Euler was a great Swiss mathematician and scientist. He is held to be one
of the greatest mathematician in the history together with Archimedes, Newton, and
Gauss. Euler was born on April 15, 1707 in Basel Switzerland. As a paster, his father
urged him to study theology and became paster too. Euler enrolled at the University of
Basel at the age of 13 with major of philosophy and theology . During that time, he was
receiving Saturday afternoon lessons from Johann Bernoulli, the foremost mathematician
in Europe. Bernoulli quickly discovered Euler’s incredible talent for mathematics, and
convinced his father that Leonhard was destined to become a great mathematician.
In 1727, Euler became a member of Imperial Russian Academy of Sciences in Saint
Petersburg. He devoted himself to research work and later became the head of mathematics department after his friend, Daniel Bernoulli left for Basel. During the 14 years
in Russia, Euler studied analytics, number theory , and mechanics. In 1747, Euler took
up a position at the Berlin Academy , which he had been offered by F rederick the Great
of Prussia. He lived for 25 years in Berlin, where he wrote over 380 articles. During
this time, his research was more extensive, involving planetary motion, rigid body movement, thermodynamics, ballistics, and demography . These work was closely connected
with his research in mathematics. Euler made groundbreakings in differential equations,
and surface differential geometry . After the political situation in Russia stabilized after
Catherine the Great’s accession to the throne, in 1766 Euler accepted an invitation to
return to the St. Petersburg Academy . He spent the rest of his life in Russia.
Euler worked in almost all areas of mathematics, such as geometry , infinitesimal calculus, trigonometry , algebra, and number theory , as well as continuum physics, lunar theory
and other areas of physics. He is a seminal figure in the history of mathematics; F rom
the age of 19 till he died at 76, he published huge number of research papers and books
in half a Century . Euler’s name is associated with almost every area in mathematics. He
was the top productive mathematician in the history with a total of 856 papers, and 31
books. And these did not counted the loss of the fire in St. Petersburg in 1771. (Euler’s
record was refreshed by Hungarian mathematician Paul Erdős in the 20th Century , who
published 1525 papers and 32 books) [ 28].3.1. GROUP 83
Stamps commemorating Leonhard Euler (1707 - 1783)
Euler had unbelievable strong willpower. His right eye lost sight from a fever. Three
years later, he became almost blind in his right eye. But even worse, his left eye lost sight
too in 1771. But Euler rather blamed the painstaking work on cartography he performed
for his condition. Just as deafness did not stop Beethoven ns music creation, blindness
did not stop Euler ns mathematical exploration[ 12]. Euler remarked on his loss of vision,
“Now I will have fewer distractions. ” As he compensated for it with his mental calculation
skills and exceptional memory . He could not only remember the first 100 prime numbers,
but also their squares, cubics, and even higher powers. He could also perform complex
mental arithmetic. With the aid of his scribes, Euler’s productivity on many areas of
study actually increased. He produced, on average, one mathematical paper every week
in the year 1775. Half of Euler’s work was dictated after his eyes were completely blind.
The F rench physicist F rançois Arago said “Euler calculated without any apparent effort,
just as men breathe, as eagles sustain themselves in the air. ” Euler could work in any bad
environments. He often held the child on the lap to complete the papers, regardless of
any noise around.
Among Euler’s work, there are diﬀicult monographs as well as readings for the general
public. Euler wrote over 200 letters to a German Princess in early 1760s, which were
later compiled into a best-selling volume entitled Letters of Euler on different Subjects
in Natural Philosophy Addressed to a German Princess . This book became more widely
read than any of his mathematical works and was published across Europe and in the
United States. The popularity of the ”Letters” testifies to Euler’s ability to communicate
scientific matters effectively to a lay audience, a rare ability for a dedicated research
scientist. Euler also wrote a course on elementary algebra for readers of non-mathematics
background, which is still in print today . Many popular mathematical notations we are
using today were carefully introduced by Euler, for example π (1736), the imaginary
uniti(1777), the base of the natural logarithm e, now also known as Euler’s number
(1748), circular function sin ,cos (1748), and tg (1753), ∆x(1755), summation∑(1755),
functionf(x)(1734) and so on[ 12].84 CHAPTER 3. SYMMETR Y
On September 18, 1783, after lunch with his family , Euler was discussing the newly
discovered planet Uranus and its orbit with a fellow academician. As usual, he played
with one of his granddaughter while having tea. Suddenly , the pipe drop from his hand.
He said “My pipe”, then bent over to pick it, but he was not able to stand, uttered only
“I am dying” before he lost consciousness. “He ceased to calculate and to live. ”21
F ermat little theorem is widely used in our everyday life, from internet shopping to
electronic payment. In 1976, professor Whitfield Diﬀie and Martin Hellman in Stanford
University developed the concept of asymmetric public-private key cryptosystem. In 1977,
Ron Rivest, Adi Shamir, and Leonard Adleman in Massachusetts Institute of T echnology
(MIT) developed a one-way function that was hard to invert based on theory of numbers.
The algorithm is now known as RSA ⚶the initials of their surnames in same order as their
paper.
The key asymmetry concept of RSA is based on the fact that we can easily create
a composite numbers from two large prime numbers, while there is practical diﬀiculty
to factor them. This is known as the factoring problem . F or a large number of over
200 digits, even the most powerful super computer will cost time longer than the age of
universe. In order to construct a encrypt key hard to break, we need a method that can
find large prime numbers fast. However, people do not know the exact pattern about how
prime numbers distributed in nature numbers. There is no formula to enumerate prime
numbers. The brute force method is to randomly pick a number n, then examine from
1 topn, check if all do not divide n. But this primality test method is very ineffective.
The time will also exceed the age of universe. A better method is the Eratosthenes sieve
algorithm. W e first enumerate all numbers from 2 to n. Starting from 2, removal all
multiples of 2, then remove all multiples of 3... Repeat this every time from the next
number that is not filtered out, till the number not greater thanpn. This process gives
all the prime numbers to n. However, it is still only applicable for small n, but can’t serve
for the large number primality test.
Interestingly , F ermat’s little theorem provides a way for fast primality test. F or a
large number n, we can randomly select a positive integer aless than it as a ‘witness’ .
Then check if the remainder of an−1modulonis 1. If not 1, nmust not be prime number
according to F ermat’s little theorem. Otherwise if it is 1, then nmay be a prime number.
The F ermat primality test algorithm (also known as F ermat test) based on this idea
can be described as below:
function primality (n)
Random select a positive integer a<n
ifan−11 modnthen
return prime number
else
return composite number
W e needn’t compute the exact value of n 1power ofa, then divide nto get the
remainder. W e can use modular arithmetic to speed up. The intermediate result can
be largely re-used. After we calculate b=a2modn, we can next get b2modn, which
equals toa4modn. F or example, when evaluate a11modn, since:
a11=a8+2+1= ((a2)2)2a2a modn
What have to calculated are only a2modn,(a2)2modn, and ((a2)2)2modn. Basically , we can express n in binary format, and only iterate calculating the modular
21In the eulogy for the F rench Academy , F rench mathematician and philosopher Marquis de Condorcet
wrote this.3.1. GROUP 85
product for the digits of 1. The complexity of this algorithm is O(lgn)(proportion to the
logarithm of n). F ermat test is very fast because of this.
However, even a number can pass F ermat test, it is not necessarily prime. F or example
341 = 11 31 is a composite number, but 23401 mod 341 can pass the F ermat test.
T o reduce the probability of such failure, people developed many improvements. The first
improvement is to increase the number of witness. W e can prove that, if a number does
not pass F ermat test, then there exist at least half of nnumbers that can’t pass too ([ 30],
pp26).
Theorem 3.1.21. F or positive integer aless thann, and coprime with n, ifan−161
modn, then for al l selected a<n , it also holds for at least half.
pass F ermat test not pass F ermat test
b ab
c
f:b!ab
Setf1,2,...,n 1g
Figure 3.24: Map from the set that pass F ermat test to the set that does not
Proof. If for some athatan−161 modn holds, then for any witness bthat passes
F ermat test (It means bn−11 modn), we can create a negative case for F ermat test
ab.
(ab)n−1an−1bn−1an−1161 modn
And because i6=j, we haveai6aj, therefore, all these negative cases are not
same.
As shown in figure 3.24 , if there exists a number that can’t pass F ermat test, then the
positive cases are as same amount as the negative cases.
If we select kdifferent witness and perform F ermat test, we can reduce the probability
of failure that nis not prime number to1
2k. However, there exist such composite number
n, that for any aless thannand coprime to n,an−11 modnholds. It means whatever
awe selected, such composite number can pass F ermat test. Carmichael found first such
number in 1910, that 561 = 3  11 17. This kind of numbers is called Carmichael
numbers or F ermat pseudoprime22. Erdős conjectured there are infinite many Carmichael
numbers. In 1994, people proved for suﬀicient large n, there are at least n2/7Carmichael
numbers from 1 to n. Thus explains Erdős’ conjecture[ 29].
22The Czech mathematician Václav Šimerka found the first 7 F ermat pseudoprimes: 561 = 3 711,
1105 = 5 137, 1729 = 7 1319, 2465 = 5 1729, 2821 = 7 1331, 6601 = 7 2341, 8911
= 71967. However, his work was not well known to the people86 CHAPTER 3. SYMMETR Y
The primality test algorithm in RSA is Miller-Rabin algorithm. It is also a probabilistic algorithm23. According to the above theorem, if select more than 100 witnesses,
the probability of failure is expected less than1
2100. Donald Knuth commented “far less,
for instance, than the probability that a random cosmic ray will sabotage the computer
during the computation!”
W e summarized the relations for group, semigroup, monoid introduced so far as the
following diagram.
abelian group
group
monoid
semigroup
associativity binary operationidentity elementinverse elementcommunity
Figure 3.25: group, semigroup, monoid
Exercise 3.8
1. T oday is Sunday , what day it will be after 2100days?
2. Given two strings (character string or list), write a program to test if they form
the same necklace.
3. W rite a program to realize Eratosthenes sieve algorithm.
4. Extend the idea of Eratosthenes sieve algorithm, write a program to generate Euler
ϕ function values for all numbers from 2 to 100.
5. W rite a program to realize fast modular multiplication, and F ermat’s primality
test.
