# (3, 1, 5) Groups and symmetry

3.1.5 Groups and symmetry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 65
3.1.5 Groups and symmetry
Why the group of all permutations of a set is called symmetric group? Because it exactly
defines what is symmetry . Let us consider a regular triangle for example:
Denote the 3 vertex as 1, 2, 3. W e choose from S3three elements, (1 2), (1 2 3), and
(1 3 2), and apply them to the triangle vertexes as shown in figure 3.14 .
1. The shape on the right side is the transformed result after applying (1 2). The
three vertexes change from 123 to 213. It is exactly the mirrored result to flip
the triangle against the axis at vertex 3. Because the shapes are same before and
after transform, it means the regular triangle is reflection symmetric. Besides (1 2),
there are another two reflection symmetric transforms, which are (1 3) and (2 3)
respectively . Their corresponding axes are the heights at vertex 2 and 1.
2. The bottom right is the transformed result after applying (1 2 3). The three vertexes
change from 123 to 231. It means the triangle rotate 120 °clockwise against its
centre. Because the shapes are same before and after, it tells us that the regular
triangle has rotational symmetry of 120 °.
3. The bottom shape is the transformed result after applying (1 3 2). The tree vertexes
change from 123 to 312. It is equivalent that the triangle rotates 120 °counter
clockwise, or rotates 240 °clockwise. Because the shapes are same before and after,
it tells us that the regular triangle has rotational symmetry of 240 °.66 CHAPTER 3. SYMMETR Y
Figure 3.14: Symmetric transforms of a regular triangle
Every symmetry of the regular triangle (3 reflection symmetries, 2 rotational symmetries, and the identity) is exactly defined by an element in the symmetric group S3. This
is the beautiful relation between groups and symmetry .
Among the transformations, those do not change the dimensions of the body are called
congruences . A congruence is either proper or improper. F or the difference, consider the
two sea snails in below figure: on the left is the normally sinistral (left-handed) shell of
Neptunea angulata, (now extinct) found mainly in the Northern Hemisphere; on the right
is the normally dextral (right-handed) shell of Neptunea despecta. a similar species found
mainly in the Southern Hemisphere. Although they looks so symmetric side by side, we
can not make them congruence no matter what rotations, flips, or motions being applied.
They are reflexive in fact.
Figure 3.15: Chirality
In real world, there is no way to tranform a sinistral object to its dextral image in
the mirror. This is the difference between proper and improper congruence. The proper3.1. GROUP 67
congruence carries a left skew into a left and a right one into a right; the improper (or
reflexive) congruence changes a left skew into a right one and vice versa[ 37]. The reflection
sends any points P to its antipode point P′with respect to O found by joining P with
O and prolonging the straight line PO by its own length: jPOj=jOP′j. It’s also called
inversion in a point. F or the four points in the figure of sea snails, the transform (2 4)
in symmetric group S4is an improper congruence. It carries the left skew snail into the
right. As such, the symmetric groups depict both the real and the mirrored worlds.
Exercise 3.5
What symmetries for what shape are defined by the symmetric group S4?
