# (3, 1, 2) Monoid and semi-group

3.1.2 Monoid and semi-group . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 55
3.1.2 Monoid and semi-group
The criteria to be a group is a bit strict. F rom the negative examples in previous section,
we see some common algebraic structures can’t satisfy all the group axioms. Sometimes
we needn’t inverse element. If relax the limitation, we get the monoid structure.56 CHAPTER 3. SYMMETR Y
Definition 3.1.2. A monoid is a setS together with a binary operation ‘ ’, which
satisfies two axioms:
1. Associativity : F or any three elements in S, the equation (ab)c=a(bc)holds.
2. Identity element : There exists an element einS, such that for every element a
inS, the equation ae=ea=eholds.
The monoid definition is quite similar to group except there is no axiom about inverse element. Many negative examples for group are monoids. F or example, integers
under multiplication form a monoid. The identity element is 1. Monoid often appears in
computer programming. W e’ll revisit this important algebraic structure in next chapter
about category theory . Here are some more examples about monoid:
1. Given a character set, all finite strings with the concatenation operation form a
monoid. The elements are strings; the binary operation is string concatenation; the
identity element is the empty string.
2. Expand from string to list of type A (List A). All lists form a monoid under the
concatenation operation. The monoid elements are lists; the binary operation is the
list concatenation (denoted as + +); the identity element is the empty list nil.
By using monoid as the algebraic structure, we can abstract both string and list as
the below example program.
instance Monoid ( List A)where
e = nil
(*) = (++)
The folding operation to string and list, can be abstracted to the level of monoid as
well13. The below concatenate operation for example, is defined to any monoid:
concat =foldr e ()
W e can concatenate list with this concat operation like this:
concat [[1],[2],[3],[1,2],[1,3],[2,3],[1,2,3],[1,3,2]] gives result: [1, 2, 3, 1, 2, 1, 3,
2, 3, 1, 2, 3, 1, 3, 2].
3. Heap is a common data structure in programming. If the top element in the heap
is always the minimum one, it’s call the min-heap; If the top element is always the
maximum one, it’s called max-heap. Skew heap is a type of heap realized in binary
tree ([ 14], section 7.3).
data SHeap A = nil | node (SHeap A, A, SHeap A)
The definition is as same as binary tree except for its name. The minimum element is
always located at the root for the none empty heap. W e define the merge operation
for two heaps as below:
merge (nil,h ) =h
merge (h,nil ) =h
merge (h1,h2) ={
k1<k 2:node (merge (r1,h2),k1,l1)
otherwise :node (merge (h1,r2),k2,l2)
13W e’ll introduce how to realize the abstract folding in next chapter about category theory3.1. GROUP 57
When merge two heaps, if one is empty , the result is the other one; if neither one
is empty , we denote h1,h2asnode (l1,k1,r1)andnode (l2,k2,r2)respectively . T o
merge them, we firstly compare their root, select the smaller one as the new root;
then merge the other heap with the bigger element to one of its sub-trees. Finally ,
we exchange the left and right sub-trees. F or example, if k1< k 2, we select k1as
the new root. Then we can either merge h2tol1, or mergeh2tor1. Without loss
of generality , we merge to r1. Then, we exchange the left and right sub-trees to get
the final result (merge (r1,h2),k1,l1). Note the binary merge operation is recursive.
The set of all the skew heaps, together with the binary merge operation form a
monoid. The identity element is the empty heap nil.
4. Heap can also be realized in multi-trees as explained in previous chapter, for example
pairing heap is defined as the following ([ 14] section 9.4):
data PHeap A = nil | node (A, List (PHeap A))
The definition is as same as multi-tree except for its name. It is a recursive definition.
A pairing heap is either empty; or a multi-tree with a root and a list of sub-trees.
The minimum element is located at the root for a none empty heap. W e define the
merge operation for pairing heap as below:
merge (nil,h ) =h
merge (h,nil ) =h
merge (h1,h2) ={
k1<k 2:node (k1,h2:ts1))
otherwise :node (k2,h1:ts2))
If either heap is empty , then the merge result is the other heap. Otherwise if neither
heap is empty , we represent the two heaps h1,h2asnode (k1,ts1)andnode (k2,ts2)
respectively . W e compare the root elements, let the bigger one be another new subtree of the other. The set of all the pairing heaps form a monoid under the merge
operation. The identity element is the empty heap nil.
If relax the limitation one more step, to remove the requirement of identity element,
then we get another algebraic structure, semigroup.
Definition 3.1.3. A semigroup is a set together with the associative binary operation.
The binary operation for semigroup is associative. It means for any three elements a,
b, andcthe equation (ab)c=a(bc)holds. The constraints for semigroup is relaxed one
more step from monoid. Here are some semigroup examples:
1. All the positive integers form a semigroup under addition, as well as under multiplication;
2. All the even numbers together with addition form a semigroup, so as under multiplication.
As we mentioned before, people often call the binary operation for group, monoid, and
semigroup as ‘multiplication’, therefore we use the term ‘power’ to represent applying the
binary operation multiple times, for example: xxx=x3. Generally , the ‘power’ of
group and monoid is defined as below recursively:
xn={
n= 0 :e
otherwise :xxn−158 CHAPTER 3. SYMMETR Y
F or semigroup, since the identity element is not defined, nmust be none zero positive
integer:
xn={
n= 1 :x
otherwise :xxn−1
Exercise 3.2
1. The set of Boolean values {T rue, F alse} forms a monoid under the logic or operator
_. It is called ‘Any’ logic monoid. What is the identity element for this monoid?
2. The set of Boolean values {T rue, F alse} forms a monoid under the logic and operator^. It is called ‘All’ logic monoid. What is the identity element for this monoid?
3. F or the comparable type, when compare two elements, there can be three different
results. W e abstract them as f<,=,>g14. F or this set, we can define a binary
operation to make it a monoid. What is the identity element for this monoid?
4. Prove that the power operation for group, monoid, and semigroup is commutative:
xmxn=xnxm
