# (3, 2) Ring and Field

3.2 Ring and Field . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 86
3.2 Ring and Field
The modern theory of rings, fields, and abstract algebra was greatly developed by German mathematician Emmy Noether. Noether was born to a Jewish family in Erlangen
Germany on March 23, 1882. Her father was a mathematician in the University of Erlangen. She originally planned to teach F rench and English after passing the required
examinations in 1900, but she chose instead to continue her studies at the University of
Erlangen where her father lectured.
This was an unconventional decision. T wo years earlier, the Academic Senate of the
university had declared that allowing mixed-sex education would “overthrow all academic
order” . As one of only two women in a university of 986 students, Noether was only allowed
to audit classes rather than participate fully , and required the permission of individual
professors whose lectures she wished to attend. Despite these obstacles, on July 14, 1903
she passed the graduation exam at a Realgymnasium in Nuremberg.
23There is a deterministic version of Miller-Rabin algorithm, but the correctness is on top of the
generalized Riemann hypothesis (GRH)[ 31 ].3.2. RING AND FIELD 87
Emmy Noether, 1882-1935During the 1903 ⚶1904 winter semester, she studied at
the University of Göttingen, attending lectures given by
astronomer Karl Schwarzschild and mathematicians Hermann Minkowski, Otto Blumenthal, F elix Klein, and David
Hilbert. Noether returned to Erlangen. She oﬀicially reentered the university in October 1904, and declared her intention to focus solely on mathematics. Under the supervision
of Paul Gordan she wrote her dissertation. F or the next
seven years (1908 ⚶1915) she taught at the University of Erlangen’s Mathematical Institute without pay only because
she was a woman.
The mathematician Ernst Fischer was an important influencer on Noether, in particular by introducing her to the
work of David Hilbert. F rom 1913 to 1916 Noether published
several papers extending and applying Hilbert’s methods to
mathematical objects such as fields of rational functions and
the invariants of finite groups. This phase marks the beginning of her engagement with abstract algebra, the field of mathematics to which she
would make groundbreaking contributions.
In the spring of 1915, Noether was invited to return to the University of Göttingen by
David Hilbert and F elix Klein. Their effort to recruit her, however, was blocked by the
philologists and historians among the philosophical faculty: W omen, they insisted, should
not become privatdozenten. Hilbert responded with indignation, stating, “I do not see
that the sex of the candidate is an argument against her admission as privatdozent. After
all, we are a university , not a bath house. ”
During her first years teaching at Göttingen she did not have an oﬀicial position and
was not paid; her family paid for her room and board and supported her academic work.
Her lectures often were advertised under Hilbert’s name, and Noether would provide
“assistance” .
Soon after arriving at Göttingen, however, she demonstrated her capabilities by proving the theorem now known as Noether’s theorem, which shows that a conservation law
is associated with any differentiable symmetry of a physical system. American physicists
Leon M. Lederman and Christopher T. Hill argue in their book Symmetry and the Beautiful Universe that Noether’s theorem is “certainly one of the most important mathematical
theorems ever proved in guiding the development of modern physics, possibly on a par
with the Pythagorean theorem” .
In 1919 the University of Göttingen allowed Noether to proceed with her habilitation.
Noether was not paid for her lectures until she was appointed to the special position in
1923.
Noether’s work in algebra began in 1920. She published the important paper Theory of
Ideals in Ring Domains in 1921. This revolutionary work gave rise to the term “Noetherian
ring” and the naming of several other mathematical objects as Noetherian. In 1931,
Noether’s student, Dutch mathematician V an der W aerden published Moderne Algebra , a
central text in the field developed by Noether. Although Noether did not seek recognition,
V an der W aerden included a note “based in part on lectures by E. Artin and E. Noether” .
This classic book influenced a generation of young mathematicians in that time. In
Göttingen, Noether supervised more than a dozen doctoral students. In November 1932,
Noether delivered one hour speech at the 9th International Congress of Mathematicians
in Zürich. with 800 attendees. Apparently , this prominent speaking position was a
recognition of the importance of her contributions to mathematics. The 1932 congress is
sometimes described as the high point of her career.
However, the huge reputation and recognition did not improve her diﬀicult situation88 CHAPTER 3. SYMMETR Y
as a woman. Her colleagues were frustrated for the fact that she was not elected to the
Göttingen academy of sciences and was never promoted to the position of full professor.
Her frugal lifestyle was due to being denied pay for her work; However, even after the
university began paying her a small salary in 1923, she continued to live a simple and
modest life.
After Hitler gain the power of German, Nazi administration persecuted Jews intensified. In 1929, Noether was taken out of the apartment where she lived. In April 1933,
Noether was forced to stop teaching at the University of Göttingen. Several of Noether’s
colleagues, including Max Born and Richard Courant, also had their positions revoked.
Noether accepted the decision calmly , providing support for others during this diﬀicult
time. Hermann W eyl later wrote that “Emmy Noether iher courage, her frankness, her
unconcern about her own fate, her conciliatory spirit iwas in the midst of all the hatred
and meanness, despair and sorrow surrounding us, a moral solace. ”
As dozens of newly unemployed professors began searching for positions outside of Germany . Albert Einstein and Hermann W eyl were appointed by the Institute for Advanced
Study in Princeton, while others worked to find a sponsor required for legal immigration.
Although Noether was the world famous mathematician, it was very hard for her to get
a position from large institutions as a women. After a series of negotiations with the
Rockefeller F oundation, a grant to Bryn Mawr College in the United States was approved
for Noether and she took a position there, starting in late 1933. This is a girl’s University , and Noether lectured there as a visiting scholar. Although she was invited to
Princeton University to give lectures, she remarked that she was not welcome at “the
men’s university , where nothing female is admitted” .
In April 1935, doctors discovered a tumor in Noether’s pelvis. She was died after the
surgery on April 14 at the age of 53.
Noether is best remembered for her contributions to abstract algebra. Nathan Jacobson wrote that: “The development of abstract algebra, which is one of the most distinctive
innovations of twentieth century mathematics, is largely due to her. ” She sometimes allowed her colleagues and students to receive credit for her ideas, helping them develop
their careers at the expense of her own. She was described by Pavel Alexandrov, Albert
Einstein, Jean Dieudonné, Hermann W eyl and Norbert Wiener as the most important
woman in the history of mathematics[ 32].
