# (3, 2, 2) Division ring and field

3.2.2 Division ring and field . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 90
vvi CONTENTS
3.2.2 Division ring and field
W e know that not all elements have inverse element in a ring. If every non-zero element
has its inverse, then it forms a special ring. F or example all rational numbers form a ring
under the normal addition and multiplication. In this ring, every non-zero element ahas
its inverse1
a.
Definition 3.2.3. A ringR is a division ring if it satisfies the fol lowing conditions:
1.R contains at least one non-zero element;
2.R has unity;
3. Every non-zero element in R is invertible (unit).
Definition 3.2.4. A commutative division ring is a fieldთ.3.3. GALOIS THEOR Y 91
According to this definition, all rational numbers form a field. Similarly , all real
numbers and all complex numbers form fields under the addition and multiplication25.
There are some interesting properties for division ring and field. There is no zero divisor
in a division ring. This is because if a6= 0 , andab= 0 , then we multiply the inverse
element ofafrom left to both sides:
a−1ab=b= 0
Thusbmust be zero, therefore, division ring is a nonzero ring (does not contain zero
divisor). The other property is that, all non-zero elements in division ring Rform a group
under multiplication, denoted as R. W e callRthe multiplicative group of division ring
R. A division ring consists of two groups: addition group and multiplication group. The
distributive axiom bridges the two groups together. W e summarized the ring, semiring,
integral domain, division ring, and field as figure 3.27 .
semiring
ring
commutative ring unit nonzero
integral domain division ring
fieldadd monoid mul monoid distributive
add invertible
mul commutative
mul invertible
Figure 3.27: semiring, ring, integral domain, and field
W e skipped some important algebraic structure here like subring, ideal, principal ideal
domain, and Euclidean domain.
