# (3, 3) Galois theory

3.3 Galois theory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 91
3.3 Galois theory
Galois theory provides connection between group and field. Using Galois theory , certain
problems in field theory can be reduced to group theory , which is in some sense simpler and
easier to understand. A field can contain infinite many elements with adding, subtracting,
multiplying, and dividing. It’s a complex mathematical object. Galois theory can simplify
the problems in field to a corresponding problem in finite group with only one operation.
This is the key idea of Galois theory .
Galois theory is famous for its diﬀiculty and hard to understand. Compare to its
original form, the modern Galois theory is no longer ambiguous, and much clearer and
elegant. This is because more than two dozens of masters greatly developed and improved
it in the past. The most important contributors are Jordan, Dedekind, and Emil Artin.
Jordan and Dedekind first systematically developed Galois theory in F rance and Germany .
The definition of Galois group we are using today was given by Dedekind. The modern
form of Galois theory is made by Artin[ 33]. W e adopted a gentle explanation that is
friendly to beginners[ 34] in this short section. It’s quite common that we can’t understand
25W e’ll see in later chapter, rational number field is countable, while real number field and complex
number field are not countable.92 CHAPTER 3. SYMMETR Y
it in the first time reading. It’s always helpful to read the masters. Our life is not linear.
I recommend the way to revisit what we learned before, find more great books to read.
Our understanding changes along the time, and there must be aha moment in the future.
