# (3, 4) F urther reading

3.4 F urther reading . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 101
4 Category 103
3.4 F urther reading
There are many textbooks introduce about abstract algebra. Groups and Symmetry by
Armstrong is a good book about basic concept of groups and how it related and define
symmetry in mathematics. Algebra by Micheal Artin is also a widely used textbook. It
introduces Galois theory in the last chapter. Galois Theory by Emil Artin published in
1944 is the classic book. It was republished several times in 1998 and 2007. Artin was
the important expositor. He gave the modern form of Galois theory . Harold M. Edwards
introduced the development history in his Galois Theory , and took the classic way to
explain this topic.102 CategoryChapter 4
Category
Mathematics is the art of giving the
same name to different things.
–Henri Poincaré
Escher, Dewdrop, 1948W elcome to the world of category! W e just
see the wounderful scence about abstract algebra
in previous chapter. Congratulation to enter the
door to the new kingdom of abstraction. The road
to this kingdom is developed by may talent minds.
In the first stage, people abstracted the concept of
number and shape from the concrete things; in the
second stage, we removed the meaning of numbers,
shapes, and concrete arithmatics, abstract them to
algebraic structures (for example group) and relations (for example isomorphism); category theory
can be considered as the third stage.
What is category? Why does it matter? Any relationship between category and
programming? Category theory was a ‘side product’ when mathematicians studied homological algebra in 1940s. In recent decades, category theory has been widely used in
varies of areas. Because of the powerful abstraction capability , it is applicable to many
problems. It may also be used as an axiomatic foundation for mathematics, as an alternative to set theory and other proposed foundations. Category theory has practical
applications in programming language theory . More and more mainstream programming
languages adopted category concepts. The usage of monads is relized in more than 20
languages[ 39]. Speaking in language of category , a monad is a monoid in the category of
endofunctors. Most of the foundamental computations have been abstracted in this way
nowadays1.
The most important thing is abstraction. Hermann W eyl said “Our mathematics of the
last few decades has wallowed in generalities and formalizations. ” The samething happens
in programming. The problems in modern computer science are challenging us with the
complexicty we never seen before. Big-data, distributed computation, high concurrency ,
as well as the requirement to consistency , security , and integrity . W e can’t catch them up
1F or example, the traditional generic folding from right:
foldr _ z [ ] = z
foldr f z (x:xs) = f x (foldr f z xs)
is written in the language of categories as: foldr f z t = appEndo (foldMap (Endo . f) t) z
W e’ll explain it later in this chapter.
103104 CHAPTER 4. CA TEGOR Y
in the traditional way , like brute-force exhaustive search, pragmatic engineering practice,
a smart idea plus some luck. It forces us to learn the new methods and tools from other
science and mathematics.
As Dieudonne said: “This abstraction which has accrued in no way sprang from a
perverse desire among mathematicans to isolate themselves from the scientific community
by the use of a hermetic language. Their task was to find solutions for problems handed
down by the ‘classical’ age , or arising directly from new discoveries in physics. They found
that this was possible, but only through the creation of new objets and new methods,
whose abstract character was indispensable to their success. ” [ 38](page 2)
Category theory was developed by mathematician Samuel Eilenberg and Sauders Mac
Lane in 1940s.
Samuel Eilenberg, 1913 1998Samuel Eilenberg born in W arsaw, Kingdom of Poland
to a Jewish family . His father is a brewer. Eilenberg studied at the University of W arsaw. A remarkable collection of
mathematicians were on the staff there. He earned his Ph.D.
from University of W arsaw in 1936. The second mathematical centre in Poland at that time was Lvov. It was there
that Eilenberg met Banach, who led the Lvov mathematicians. He joined the community of mathematicians working
and drinking in the Scottish Café and he contributed problems to the Scottish Book, the famous book in which the
mathematicians working in the Café entered unsolved problems. In 1939 Eilenberg’s father convinced him that the right
course of action was to emigrate to the United States. Once
there he went to Princeton. This was not too long in coming and, in 1940, he was appointed as an instructor at the
University of Michigan. In 1949 André W eil was working at
the University of Chicago and he contacted Eilenberg to ask
him to collaborate on writing about homotopy groups and
fibre spaces as part of the Bourbaki project. Eilenberg became a member of the Bourbaki team. He wrote the 1956 book Homological Algebra with Henri Cartan. Eilenberg
mainly studied algebriac topology . He worked on the axiomatic treatment of homology
theory with Norman Steenrod, and on homological algebra with Saunders Mac Lane. In
the process, Eilenberg and Mac Lane created category theory . Eilenberg spent much of
his career as a professor at Columbia University . Later in life he worked mainly in pure
category theory , being one of the founders of the field. He was awarded W olf prize in
1987 for his fundamental work in algebraic topology and homological algebra. Eilenberg
died in New Y ork City in January 1998.
Eilenberg was also a prominent collector of Asian art. His collection mainly consisted
of small sculptures and other artifacts from India, Indonesia, Nepal, Thailand, Cambodia, Sri Lanka and Central Asia. He donated more than 400 items to the Metropolitan
Museum of Art in 1992[ 40].
Saunders Mac Lane was born in Norwich, Connecticut in United State in 1909. He
was christened ”Leslie Saunders MacLane”, but ”Leslie” was later removed because his
parents dislike it. He began inserting a space into his surname because his wife found it
diﬀicult to type the name without a space.
In high school, Mac Lane’s favorite subject was chemistry . While in high school, his
father died, and he came under his grandfather’s care. His half-uncle helped to send
him to Y ale University , and paid his way there beginning in 1926. His mathematics
teacher, Lester S. Hill, coached him for a local mathematics competition which he won,
setting the direction for his future work. He studied mathematics and physics as a double4.1. CA TEGOR Y 105
major, and graduated from Y ale with a B.A. in 1930. In 1929, at a party of Y ale football
supporters in New Jersey , Mac Lane was awarded a prize for having the best grade point
average yet recorded at Y ale. He met Robert Maynard Hutchins, the new president of
the University of Chicago, who encouraged him to go there for his graduate studies[ 41].
Mac Lane Joined University of Chicago2. At the University of Chicago he was influenced
by Eliakim Moore, who was nearly seventy years old. He adviced Mac Lane to study
for a doctorate at Göttingen in Germany certainly persuaded Mac Lane to work at the
foremost mathematical research centre in the world at that time. In 1931, having earned
his master’s degree, Mac Lane earned a fellowship from the Institute of International
Education and became one of the last Americans to study at the University of Göttingen
prior to its decline under the Nazis.
Saunders Mac Lane, 1909 2005At Göttingen, Mac Lane studied with Paul Bernays
and Hermann W eyl. Before he finished his doctorate,
Bernays had been forced to leave the university because
he was Jewish, and W eyl became his main examiner.
Mac Lane also studied with Gustav Herglotz and Emmy
Noether. In 1934, he finished his doctor degree and
returned to United State3.
In 1944 and 1945, Mac Lane also directed Columbia
University’s Applied Mathematics Group, which was involved in the war effort. Mac Lane was vice president
of the National Academy of Sciences and the American
Philosophical Society , and president of the American
Mathematical Society . While presiding over the Mathematical Association of America in the 1950s, he initiated
its activities aimed at improving the teaching of modern mathematics. He was a member of the National
Science Board, 1974 ⚶1980, advising the American government. In 1976, he led a delegation of mathematicians
to China to study the conditions affecting mathematics
there. Mac Lane was elected to the National Academy of Sciences in 1949, and received
the National Medal of Science in 1989.
Mac Lann’s early work was in field theory and valuation theory . In 1941, while giving
a series of visiting lectures at the University of Michigan, he met Samuel Eilenberg and
began what would become a fruitful collaboration on the interplay between algebra and
topology . He and Eilenberg originated category theory in 1945.
Mac Lane died on April 14th, 2005 in San F rancisco, California, USA.
