# (4, 3) Products and coproducts

4.3 Products and coproducts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 118
4.3 Products and coproducts
Before we introduce more complex categories and functors, let us see what product and
coproduct are. W e start from the product of sets. Given two set AandB, their Cartesian
productAB is the set of all ordered pairs (a,b), wherea2A andb2B:
f(a,b)ja2A,b2Bg
F or example, the product of finite sets f1,2,3gandfa,bgis:
f(1,a),(2,a),(3,a),(1,b),(2,b),(3,b)g
If setA andB are the same algebraic structures, like group, ring etc., then we can
define objects and arrows as shown in below diagram:4.3. PRODUCTS AND COPRODUCTS 119
(a,b)
AB
aA Bb
René Descartes (1596 - 1650). Portrait after F rans Hals, oil on canvas, Louvre Museum
Cartesian product, also known as direct product, is named after René Descartes, the
great F rench philosopher, mathematician, and scientist. In the days of Descartes, Latin
was a widely used academy language. He also had a Latinized name: Renatus Cartesius.
Its adjective form is Cartesian. This is the reason why we say Cartesian product or
Cartesian coordinate system today .
Descartes was born in La Haye, near T ours, F rance in 1596. His father was a member
of the Parlement of Brittany at Rennes. His mother died a year after giving birth to him,
and so he was not expected to survive. His father then remarried in 1600. Descartes lived
with his grandmother at La Haye. His health was poor when he was a child. Throughout
his childhood, up to his twenties, he was pale and had a persistent cough which was
probably due to tuberculosis. It seems likely that he inherited these health problems
from his mother.
In 1607, he entered the Jesuit college of La Flèche, where he was introduced to mathematics and physics, including Galileo’s work. While in the school his health was poor
and, instead of rising at 5 AM. like the other boys, he was granted permission to remain
in bed until 11 o’clock in the morning, a custom he maintained until the year of his death.
After graduation in 1614, he studied for two years at the University of Poitiers. He
received a law degree in 1616 to comply with his father’s wishes but he quickly decided
that this was not the path he wanted to follow. He returned to Paris, then became a
volunteer in the army of Maurice of Nassau. In the army , Descartes started studying
mathematics and mechanics under the Dutch scientist Isaac Beeckman, and began to
seek a unified science of nature.120 CHAPTER 4. CA TEGOR Y
After this time in Holland he left the service of Maurice of Nassau and travelled
through Europe. In 1619 he joined the Bavarian army and was stationed in Ulm. An
important event in his life was three dreams he had in November 1619. These he believed
were sent by a divine spirit with the intention of revealing to him a new approach to
philosophy . The ideas from these dreams would dominate much of his work from that
time on.
F rom 1620 to 1628 Descartes travelled through Europe, spending time in Bohemia,
Hungary , Germany , Holland, through Switzerland to Italy , then V enice and Rome. He
returned Paris in 1625. His Paris home became a meeting place for philosophers and
mathematicians and steadily became more and more busy . By 1628 Descartes, tired of
the bustle of Paris, the house full of people, and of the life of travelling he had before,
decided to settle down where he could work in solitude. He gave much thought to choosing
a country suited to his nature and he chose Holland. What he longed for was somewhere
peaceful where he could work away from the distractions of a city such as Paris yet still
have access to the facilities of a city . It was a good decision which he did not seem to regret
over the next twenty years. He told his friend Marin Mersenne19where he was living so
that he might keep in touch with the mathematical world, but otherwise he kept his place
of residence a secret. Descartes wrote all his major work during his 20-plus years in the
Netherlands, initiating a revolution in mathematics and philosophy . In 1633, Galileo was
condemned by the Italian Inquisition, and Descartes abandoned plans to publish T reatise
on the W orld , his work of the previous four years. Nevertheless, in 1637 he published
parts of this work in three essays: The Meteors ,Dioptrics and Geometry , preceded by an
introduction, his famous Discourse on the Method .
In Geometry , Descartes exploited the discoveries he made with Pierre de F ermat.
This later became known as Cartesian Geometry . Descartes continued to publish works
concerning both mathematics and philosophy for the rest of his life. In 1641 he published
a metaphysics treatise, Meditations on First Philosophy . It was followed in 1644 by
Principles of Philosophy . He became the most influential philosophers in Europe.
In 1649 Queen Christina of Sweden persuaded Descartes to go to Stockholm. However
the Queen wanted to draw tangents at 5 AM. and Descartes broke the habit of his lifetime
of getting up at 11 o’clock. After only a few months in the cold northern climate, walking
to the palace for 5 o’clock every morning, he died of pneumonia F ebruary 1650 at the age
of 54.
Descartes left the best known philosophical statement “I think, therefore I am” (F rench:
Je pense, donc je suis; Latin: cogito, ergo sum). Descartes laid the foundation for 17thcentury continental rationalism. He was well-versed in mathematics as well as philosophy ,
and contributed greatly to science as well. He is credited as the father of analytical geometry , the bridge between algebra and geometry iused in the discovery of infinitesimal
calculus and analysis. Descartes was also one of the key figures in the Scientific Revolution.
Symmetric to the Cartesian product of sets, there is a dual construct. F rom two sets
A andB, we can generate a disjoint union set (sum) A+B. F or the element in the sum,
in order to know which set A orB it comes from, we can add a tag:
A+B= (Af0g)[(Bf1g)
F or every element (x,tag )inA+B, if thetag is 0, we know that xcomes from A, else
if thetag is 1, thenxcomes from B. Hence the sum of finite set f1,2,3gandfa,bgis
19Mersenne was a F rench polymath, whose works touched a wide variety of fields. He is perhaps best
known today among mathematicians for Mersenne prime numbers, in the form Mn= 2n−1for some
integer n. He had many contacts in the scientific world and has been called ”the center of the world of
science and mathematics during the first half of the 1600s” .4.3. PRODUCTS AND COPRODUCTS 121
f(1,0),(2,0),(3,0),(a,1),(b,1)g
When programming, A+B can be defined as:
A+B=zip Af0,...g+ +zip Bf1,...g
If setA andB are the same algebraic structures, we can define the below objects and
arrows:
aA Bb
(a,0)A+B (b,1)
The two constructions are symmetric. If rotate the two diagrams by 90 degree, laying
A on top ofB, then the two problems appear left and right. They are symmetric like our
two hands. W e can find a lot of such symmetric concepts in category theory . Our world
is full of symmetric things. When we understand one, we understand the dual one at the
same time.
