# (4, 8) Appendix - example programs

4.8 Appendix - example programs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 158
5 F usion 161
4.8 Appendix - example programs
Definition of functors:
class Functor fwhere
fmap :: (a !b)!f a !f b
The Maybe functor:
instance Functor Maybe where
fmap _ Nothing =Nothing
fmap f ( Just a) =Just (f a)
Look up in binary search tree with Maybe functor, and convert the result to binary
format:Mathematics of Programming 159
lookup Nil _ =Nothing
lookup (Node l k r) x jx<k=lookup l x
jx>k=lookup r x
jotherwise =Just k
lookupBin =(fmap binary) lookup
Definition of bifunctor:
class Bifunctor f where
bimap :: (a !c)!(b!d)!f a b !f c d
Definition of product and coproduct functors:
instance Bifunctor (,) where
bimap f g (x, y) =(f x, g y)
instance Bifunctor Either where
bimap f _ ( Left a)=Left (f a)
bimap _ g ( Right b)=Right (g b)
Definition of curry and its reverse uncurry :
curry :: ((a, b) !c)!a!b!c
curry f x y =f (x, y)
uncurry :: (a !b!c)!((a, b) !c)
uncurry f (x, y) =f x y
Definition of monoid:
class Semigroup a )Monoid a where
mempty :: a
mappend :: a !a!a
mappend =(< >)
mconcat :: [a] !a
mconcat =foldr mappend mempty
Definition of foldable:
newtype Endo a =Endo { appEndo :: a !a }
class Foldable t where
foldr :: (a !b!b)!b!t a !b
foldr f z t =appEndo (foldMap (Endo f) t) z
foldMap :: Monoid m )(a!m)!t a !m
foldMap f =foldr (mappend f) mempty160 F usionChapter 5
F usion
... mathematical knowledge ... is, in
fact, merely verbal knowledge. “3”
means “2+1”, and “4” means “3+1” .
Hence it follows (though the proof is
long) that “4” means the same as
“2+2” . Thus mathematical knowledge
ceases to be mysterious.
– Bertrand Russell
Penrose triangleI still remember the mathematics class in high
school. My teacher often wrote down a complex formula with many alphabetic symbols in the blackboard, then asked us to simplify it. Some student
stood up, volunteered to do it in front of the class.
Combining like terms, factorization, ... all means
were attempted. It liked a magic process often led
to unbelievable simple result. Of course sometimes
the guy was stuck or trapped in loops, and finally
saved by our teacher.
Chalk and blackboard, Such experience was unforgettable, just like happened yesterday . I was so
impressed to the mythical power of reasoning. I
always wanted to know more formulas, that could
help me to deduce the result.
The magic is that, we even needn’t care about the concrete meanings when doing the
deduction. It likes building bricks, from different parts, we finally build an interesting
toy . These formulas and theorems can also be combined together, and finally build an
interesting result. When meet a2+ 2ab+b2, then turn it into (a+b)2, just like mating
two bricks. W e needn’t force ourselves to remind the geometric meanings for this formula
when deducing it.
W e use two examples in this chapter to demonstrate how to do deduction in programming. F or every example, we’ll both explain the intuitive concrete meanings, and give
the purely formal deduction process. Just like the (a+b)2case, on one hand, we can
explain it as the total area from two different squares and two equal rectangles; on the
other hand, we can also deduce the same result step by step.
161162 CHAPTER 5. FUSION
a2b2
a abb ab
a+b
Figure 5.2: Geometric illustration for (a+b)2=a2+ 2ab+b2
(a+b)2= (a+b)(a+b) Definition of square
=a(a+b) +b(a+b) Distribution law for multiplication
=a2+ab+ba+b2Distribution law again
=a2+ 2ab+b2Combinedab andba
