# (5, 1) foldr/build fusion

5.1 foldr/build fusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 162
5.1 foldr/build fusion
The first example is the foldr/build fusion law. In 2015, a main stream programming
language Java adopted lambda expression and a set of functional tools in its 1.8 version.
However, some programmer soon found the chained function calls brought elegance and
expressiveness at the penalty of performance if using carelessly . One reason is the chained
functions may generate excessive intermediate results. While these intermediate results
are not necessary simple values, but the complete list, container, or collection of complex
structures. They are thrown away after consumed by the next functions. However, the
same level of new result will be generated step by step. Such pattern that produce,
one time consume, thrown away , then produce again, happens along the function chain
repeatedly , which causes computation overhead.
F or example, we can define below function to examine if every element in a list satisfies
a given prediction[ 52].
all(p,xs ) =and(map (p,xs ))
Such that all(prime, [2,3,5,7,11,13,17,19,...]) tells if all numbers in the list are
primes. However, the performance of this realization is poor. Firstly , map (prime,xs )
generates a list of the same length as xs, every element is a Boolean value [T rue, T rue,
...], indicating the corresponding number is prime or not. Then the list of Boolean values
is passed to and function, examine if there exists F alse value. Finally , both xs and the
Boolean list are thrown away , only one Boolean value is returned as the result.
Below is an alternative definition. It can avoid generating the intermediate Boolean
list.
all(p,xs ) =h(xs){
h([]) =True
h(x:xs) =p(x)^h(xs)
Although this realization does not generate intermediate result, it is neither intuitive5.1. FOLDR/BUILD FUSION 163
nor elegant compare to and(map (p,xs ). Are there any way that has the advantage of
both methods? W e found some transformations satisfy such requirement, for example:
map sqrt (map abs xs ) =map (sqrtabs)xs
First generate a list of absolute values, then evaluate square root for every number. It
is equivalent to take absolute value first, then evaluate the square root for every number
in that list. Hence we have the following rule:
map f (map g xs ) =map (fg)xs (5.1)
However, there are too many rules. W e can’t list them all. It’s not practical to apply
them on a complex program. Gill, Launchbury , and Peyton Jones developed a method
in 1993, starting from the basic build and folding operation, they found the pattern to
optimize the chained function.
