# (5, 2, 2) Improvement

5.2.2 Improvement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 173
5.2.2 Improvement
How can we improve the exhaustive search? Observe the right to left expand process. W e
write down 9 first, then expand 3 new expressions with 8. They are: 89, 89 = 72 , and
8 + 9 = 17. In the next step when expand with 7, expression 789 exceeds 100 obviously .
W e can drop it immediately . Any new expressions expanded to the left of 789 won’t be
100. W e can safe to drop them all to avoid unnecessary computation. Similarly , 789
exceeds 100, hence can be dropped to avoid further expansion on the left. Only 7 + 89 is
the possible expression. Next we expand 789, it is bigger than 100, hence is dropped
for further expansion...
In summary , we can evaluate the expression during the expanding process. Whenever
exceeds 100, we immediately drop it to avoid further expansion. The whole process looks
like a tree growing. When the expression in a branch exceeds 100, we cut that branch off.
989 89 8 + 9789 789 7 + 89789789 7 + 89
78 + 9 78 + 9 7 + 8 + 9
Figure 5.3: The process to expand expressions looks like a tree growing.
In order to evaluate the expression during expansion easily , we separate the value of
the expression into 3 parts: the value of the first factor in the first sub-expression f;
the product of the rest factors in the first sub-expression vfs; and the sum of the rest
sub-expressions vts. The overall value of the expression can be calculated out of them as
fvfs+vts.
When expand a new digit don the left, corresponding to the 3 options, the expression
and value are updated as the following:
1. Insert nothing, prepend dbefore the first factor as its most significant digit. The
expression value is (d10n+1+f)vfs+vts, wherenis the number of digits of f.
The 3 parts of the value update to: f′=d10n+1+f,vfs andvtsare unchanged;
2. Insert, putdas the first factor in the first sub-expression. The expression value
isdfvfs+vts. The 3 parts of the value update to: f′=d,vfs′=fvfs, while
vts is unchanged;174 CHAPTER 5. FUSION
3. Insert +, use das the new first sub-expression. The expression value is d+fvfs+
vts. The 3 parts of the value update to: f′=d,vfs′= 1,vts′=fvfs+vts.
T o calculate 10n+1in the first option easily , we can record the exponent as the fourth
part of the expression value. As such, the value is represented as a 4-tuple (e,f,v fs,vts).
The function to calculate the value is defined as:
value (e,f,v fs,vts) =fvfs+vts (5.12)
When expand expression, we also update the 4-tuple at the same time:
add d (((ds:fs) :ts),(e,f,v fs,vts)) =
[(((d:ds) :fs) :ts, (10e,de+f,vfs,vts)),
(([d] :ds:fs) :ts, (10,d,fvfs,vts)),
([[d]] : (ds:fs) :ts, (10,d,1,fvfs+vts))](5.13)
F or every expression and 4-tuple, we call value function to calculate the value, drop
it if exceeds 100. Then concatenate the candidate expressions and the 4-tuples to a list.
According to this idea, we re-define the previous extend function as below:
{
expand d [] = [(expr (d),(10,d,1,0))]
expand d evs =concatMap ((filter ((100)valuesnd))(add d ))evs(5.14)
W e are ready to fold on expand , generate all candidate expressions and 4-tuples that
do not exceed 100. Finally , we calculate the result from the 4-tuples, and leave only those
equal to 100.
map fstfilter ((= 100)valuesnd) (foldr expand [] [1,2,...,9]) (5.15)
The complete program based on this definition is given in the appendix of this chapter.
There are total 7 expressions evaluate to 100.
1 : 123 + 4 + 5 + 6 + 7 + 8 9
2 : 1 + 2 + 3 + 4 + 5 + 6 + 7 + 8 9
3 : 1234 + 5 + 6 + 78 + 9
4 : 12 + 34 + 5 + 6 + 78 + 9
5 : 1 + 23 + 4 + 5 + 67 + 8 + 9
6 : 12 + 34 + 5 + 67 + 8 + 9
7 : 12 + 34 + 56 + 7 + 8 + 9
Exercise 5.2
1. Use the fusion law to optimize the expression evaluation function:
eval =summap (product(map dec ))
2. How to expand all expressions from left?
3. The following definition converts expression to string:
str= (join “+”)(map ((join “”)(map (showdec))))
Whereshow converts number to string. F unction join (c,s)concatenates multiple
stringsswith delimiter c. F or example: join (“#”,[“abc”, “def” ]) = “abc#def” .
Use the fusion law to optimize str .5.3. FUR THER READING 175
5.3 F urther reading
Program deduction is a special mathematical deduction. With this tool, we can start from
intuitive, raw, and unoptimized definition, through a formalized methods and theorems,
step by step convert it to elegant and optimized result. Bird gives many such examples
in his Pearls of F unctional Algorithm Design [53].
The correctness of program deduction is based on mathematics. Instead of relying
on human intuition, we need a dedicated theory , that can formalize varies of programs
into strict mathematical form. The foldr/build fusion law is such an example. In the
1993 paper[ 52], people developed a tool to simplify program systematically . As the category theory being widely adopted in programming, a series of fusion laws have been
developed[ 54], and applied to program deduction and optimization.
