# (5, 2, 1) Exhaustive search

5.2.1 Exhaustive search . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 171
5.2.1 Exhaustive search
Let’s first model the expression consist of digits, +, and . Consider the example:
12 + 34 + 56 + 7 + 8 + 9
As multiplication is prior to addition, we can treat it as a list of sub-expressions
separated by +. Hence the above example is identical to:
sum [12,34,56,7,8,9]
In summary , we define an expression as one or multiple sub-expressions separated by
+ in the form of t1+t2+...+tn, or in the list form of expr = [t1,t2,...,t n]. The formal
definition is:
type Expr = [Term]
F or every sub-expression, we treat it as one or multiple factors separated by . F or
example, 56 =product [5,6]. This definition is also applicable for a single number, like
34. It can be treated as 34 =product [34] . Hence we can define sub-expression as the
product of factors f1f2...fm, or in the list form: term = [f1,f2,...,f m]:
type Term = [Factor]
Every factor is consist of digits. F or example, 34 has two digits, while 5 has only 1.
In summary factor = [d1,d2,...,d k].
type Factor = [Int]
It’s a folding process to evaluate the decimal value from a list of digits. F or example,
[1,2,3])(((110) + 2)10) + 3 . W e can define it as a function.
dec=foldl (n d7!n10 +d) 0
The exhaustive search need examine every possible expression evaluates to 100 or not.
W e need define a function to evaluate a given expression. F rom the expression definition,
we need define the process to recursively evaluate every sub-expression (term), and sum
them up; further, we also need recursively evaluate every factor, and multiply them up;
in the end, we call dec function to evaluate each factor.172 CHAPTER 5. FUSION
eval =summap (product(map dec ))
Obviously , this definition can be optimized with the fusion law. W e leave the detailed
deduction as the exercise, and directly give the result here:
eval =foldr (t ts7!(foldr (()fork (dec,id )) 1t) +ts) 0
Wherefork (f,g)x= (f x,gx ). It applies two functions to a given variable separately ,
and forms a pair. F rom this result, we can write a definition with both good performance
and readability:
{
eval [] = 0
eval(t:ts) =product (map dec t ) +eval(ts)
According to this definition, the result is 0 if the expression is empty; otherwise, we
take the first sub-expression, evaluate all its factors, and multiply them together. Then
add it to the result of the rest sub-expressions. W e repeatedly call eval for all possible
expressions, and filter the candidates unless they evaluate to 100.
filter (e7!eval(e) == 100)es
Wherees is the set contains all the possible expressions of 1 to 9. How to generate
this set? Starting from empty set, every time, we pick a number from 1 to 9 to expand the
expressions. F rom the empty set and a given number d, we can only build one expression
[[[d]]]. The inner most is the singleton factor consist of the only digit d, hencefact = [d];
then there is the sub-expression consist of this factor term = [fact ] = [[d]]; this only
sub-expression forms the final expression [term ] = [[fact ]] = [[[d]]]. W e define this edge
expression building process as:
expr (d) = [[[d]]]
F or the common cases, we start from right, repeatedly pick numbers 9, 8, 7, ... to
expand the expression. On top of a set of expressions [e1,e2,...,e n], how to expand all
possible expressions from the next digit d? W e’ve mentioned that there are 3 options
between two numbers: 1) insert nothing; 2) insert +; 3) insert . Let’s see what does
each option mean for every expression eiin the set. W rite eias the sum of sub-expressions
ei=t1+t2+..., where the first sub-expression t1can be further written as product of
factorst1=f1f2....
1. Insert nothing means prepend digit dto the first factor in the first sub-expression
inei. Henced:f1form a new factor. F or example, let eibe8 + 9 , anddbe 7.
W riting 7 before 8 + 9 without inserting any symbol, gives a new expression 78 + 9 ;
2. Insert means to use dform a new factor [d], then prepend it before the first subexpression in ei. Hence [d] :t1gives a new sub-expression. F or the same example
of8 + 9 , we write 7 before it, and insert a  symbol between 7 and 8. It gives the
new expression 78 + 9 ;
3. Insert + means to use dform a new sub-expression [[d]], then prepend it to eito
form a new expression [[d]] :ei. F or the same example of 8 + 9 , we write 7 before
it, and insert a + between 7 and 8. It gives the new expression 7 + 8 + 9 .
Below definition summarizes these three options:
add d ((ds:fs):ts) = [((d:ds):fs):ts,
([d]:ds:fs):ts,
[[d]]:(ds:fs):ts]5.2. MAKE A CENTUR Y 173
Whereeiis written in the form of (ds:fs) :ts. The first sub-expression in eiis
ds:fs , and the first factor in the first sub-expression is ds. F rom every expression,
we can expand 3 new ones. Given the expression list [e1,e2,...,e n], we can expand for
everyone, then concatenate the results together. It is exactly the concatMap function we
mentioned in the previous section.
{
extend d [] = [expr (d)]
extend d es =concatMap (add d )es
Therefore, we obtain the complete definition of the exhaustive search method.
filter (e7!eval(e) == 100) ( foldr extend [1..9]) (5.11)
