# (5, 4) Appendix - example source code

5.4 Appendix - example source code . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 175
6 Infinity 177
5.4 Appendix - example source code
Thebuild andconcatMap definition in Haskell.
build :: forall a. (forall b. (a -> b -> b) -> b -> b) -> [a]
build g = g (:) []
concatMap f xs = build (\c n -> foldr (\x b -> foldr c b (f x)) n xs)
Exhaustive search solution for ‘Making a Century’ puzzle:
type Expr = [Term] -- | T1 + T2 + ... Tn
type Term = [Factor] -- | F1 * F2 * ... Fm
type Factor = [Int] -- | d1d2...dk
dec :: Factor -> Int
dec = foldl (\n d -> n * 10 + d) 0
expr d = [[[d]]] -- | single digit expr
eval [] = 0
eval (t:ts) = product ( map dec t) + eval ts
extend :: Int -> [Expr] -> [Expr]
extend d [] = [expr d]
extend d es = concatMap (add d) es where
add :: Int -> Expr -> [Expr]
add d ((ds:fs):ts) = [((d:ds):fs):ts,
([d]:ds:fs):ts,
[[d]]:(ds:fs):ts]
sol = filter ((==100) . eval ) . foldr extend []
The improved exhaustive search solution:
value (_, f, fs, ts) = f * fs + ts
expand d [] = [(expr d, (10, d, 1, 0))]
expand d evs = concatMap (( filter ((<= 100) . value . snd)) . (add d)) evs
where
add d (((ds:fs):ts), (e, f, vfs, vts)) =
[(((d:ds):fs):ts, (10 * e, d * e + f, vfs, vts)),
(([d]:ds:fs):ts, (10, d, f * vfs, vts)),
([[d]]:(ds:fs):ts, (10, d, 1, f * vfs + vts))]
sol = map fst . filter ((==100) . value . snd) . foldr expand []176 InfinityChapter 6
Infinity
I see it, but I don’t believe it.
ii Georg Cantor, in a letter to
Dedekind in 1877
Escher, Circle limit IV (Heaven and Hell),
1960Long time ago, our ancestor looked up
at the starry sky , facing the vast galaxy ,
and asked, how big is the world we live
in? As the intelligence being, our mind
exceeds ourselves, exceeds our planet and
universe. W e keep thinking about the concept of infinity . People first abstracted
numbers from concrete things. F rom three
goats hunted, three fruits collected, three
jars made, abstracted number three to represent any three things. At early time,
the numbers were not big. They were
enough to satisfy everyday life, hunting,
and work. As civilization evolved, people started trading things. V aries numbering systems were developed to support the
bigger and bigger numbers. At some time
point, we came up with the question: what
is the biggest number? There were two different opinions to it. Some people didn’t
think the question make sense. It’s already big enough for numbers like thousands or
millions in ancient time in everyday work and life. W e needn’t trouble ourselves with big
numbers that would never being used. It’s safe to consider for example, the number of
sand-grains in the world is infinity . In ancient Greece, people thought ten thousands was
a very big number, and named it ‘murias’ . It finally changed to ‘myriad’, means infinity[ 57]. In Buddhism, people also use ‘the sand in Ganges River’ to indicate the numbers
that are too large to count. In the Mahayana Buddhist classic work The Diamond Sutra ,
it said: “If a virtuous man or woman filled a number of universes, as great as the number
of sand-grains in all these rivers, with the seven treasures, and gave them all away in alms
(dana), would his or her merit be great?” Other people had different opinion. Ancient
Greek mathematician, Archimedes believed, even the sands-grains that filled the whole
universe, can be represented with a definite number. In his book, The Sand-Reckoner ,
177178 CHAPTER 6. INFINITY
Archimedes said:
THERE are some, King Gelon, who think that the number of the sand
is infinite in multitude; and I mean by the sand not only that which exists
about Syracuse and the rest of Sicily but also that which is found in every
region whether inhabited or uninhabited. Again there are some who, without
regarding it as infinite, yet think that no number has been named which is
great enough to exceed its multitude. And it is clear that they who hold this
view, if they imagined a mass made up of sand in other respects as large as
the mass of the Earth, including in it al l the seas and the hol lows of the Earth
fil led up to a height equal to that of the highest of the mountains, would be
many times further stil l from recognising that any number could be expressed
which exceeded the multitude of the sand so taken. But I wil l try to show you
by means of geometrical proofs, which you wil l be able to fol low, that, of the
numbers named by me and given in the work which I sent to Zeuxippus, some
exceed not only the number of the mass of sand equal in magnitude to the Earth
fil led up in the way described, but also that of a mass equal in magnitude to
the universe.
The cover of The Sand-Recokoner . Archimedes Thoughtful by Domenico F etti (1620)
Archimedes thought it only need 1063sand-grains to fill the universe. The universe
he meant was the sphere of the fixed star, which was about twenty thousands times the
radius of the Earth. W e know the observable universe is about 46.5 billion light-years
nowadays, consist of around 31074atoms1. Archimedes was definitely genius in ancient
Greek time, he demonstrated how to quantify the ‘infinite big’ things. There are many
words in different languages serve as the unit for big numbers. The following table list
these words in Chinese, they increase for every 104([58], pp31).
1Also said to have 1080to1087elementary particles.6.1. THE INFINITY CONCEPT 179
ࣘ 1016ᄛ 1044
Ꮒ (gāi) 1020ࠞ 1048
ᬞ (zǐ) 1024ފޚ೬ 1052
ᬬ (ráng) 1028έ೧ᨁ (zhī) 1056
܎ 1032ପႮ෰ 1060
ࡸ 1036҂ॖනၰ 1064
ᆞ 1040໭ਈնඔ 1068
Many such words come from Buddhism, like ‘ ފޚ೬ ’, means the sand-grain in Ganges
River. It has 52 zeros after 1. Below table lists the unit words in English. Starting from
one, there is a unit for every 1000 magnitude. Compare to 10000 magnitude step in
Chinese, we can see the culture difference.
thousand 103quattuordecillion 1045octovigintillion 1087
million 106quindecillion 1048novemvigintillion 1090
billion 109sexdecillion 1051trigintillion 1093
trillion 1012septdecillion 1054untrigintillion 1096
quadrillion 1015octodecillion 1057duotrigintillion 1099
quintillion 1018novemdecillion 1060googol 10100
sexillion 1021vigintillion 1063
septillion 1024unvigintillion 1066
octillion 1027duovigintillion 1069
noniliion 1030trevigintillion 1072
decillion 1033quattuorvigintillion 1075
undecillion 1036quinvigintillion 1078
duodecillion 1039sexvigintillion 1081
tredecillion 1042seprvigintillion 1084
The last unit, googol, was coined in 1920 by 9-year-old Milton Sirotta, nephew of U.S.
mathematician Edward Kasner. It is written as the digit 1 followed by one hundred zeros.
The internet company Google’s name came from this word[ 59].
