# (6, 1) The infinity concept

6.1 The infinity concept . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 179
6.1 The infinity concept
Whether there exists infinity that beyond all concrete numbers? It is not only a mathematical problem, but also a philosophical problem. Infinity also leads to the concept of
infinitesimal (infinitely small). Ancient Greek philosopher, Zeno of Elea thought of a set
of problems about infinity . Some of them are preserved in Aristotle’s Physics . Among
them, four paradoxes are most famous.
The first one is the most popular, named Achilles and the tortoise paradox. Achilles
In Greek mythology , was a hero of the T rojan W ar He is the greatest of all the Greek
warriors, and is the central character of Homer’s Iliad . In this paradox, Achilles is in
a footrace with the tortoise. Achilles allows the tortoise ahead start, for example 100
meters. Supposing that each racer starts running at some constant speed, one faster than
the other. After some finite time, Achilles will have run 100 meters, bringing him to the
tortoise’s starting point. During this time, the tortoise has run a much shorter distance,
say 2 meters. It will then take Achilles some further time to run that distance, by which
time the tortoise will have advanced farther; and then more time still to reach this third
point, while the tortoise moves ahead. Thus, whenever Achilles arrives somewhere the
tortoise has been, he still has some distance to go before he can even reach the tortoise. as
shown in figure 6.3 . Although it contradicts our common sense in real life, the argument180 CHAPTER 6. INFINITY
Figure 6.3: Achilles and the tortoise
is so convincing. This paradox attracted many great minds for thousands of years. Lewis
Carrol, and Douglas Hofstadter even took Achilles and the tortoise as figures in their
literary works.
Figure 6.4: Dichotomy paradox
The second one is called Dichotomy paradox. Atalanta is a character in Greek mythology , a virgin huntress. Suppose Atalanta wishes to walk to the end of a path. Before she
can get there, she must get halfway there. Before she can get halfway there, she must get
a quarter of the way there. Before traveling a quarter, she must travel one-eighth; before
an eighth, one-sixteenth; and so on. This description requires one to complete an infinite
number of tasks, which Zeno maintains is an impossibility . The paradoxical conclusion
then would be that travel over any finite distance can neither be completed nor begun,
and so all motion must be an illusion.
The third one is called arrow paradox. Zeno states that for motion to occur, an object
must change the position which it occupies. He gives an example of an arrow in flight. In
any one (duration-less) instant of time, the arrow is neither moving to where it is, nor to
where it is not. It cannot move to where it is not, because no time elapses for it to move
there; it cannot move to where it is, because it is already there. In other words, at every
instant of time there is no motion occurring. If everything is motionless at every instant,
and time is entirely composed of instants, then motion is impossible. Whereas the first
two paradoxes divide space, this paradox starts by dividing time iand not into segments,6.1. THE INFINITY CONCEPT 181
but into points.
Figure 6.5: Arrow paradox
The fourth one is called the moving rows paradox, or stadium paradox. It’s also
about dividing time into atomic points. As shown in figure 6.6 , there are three rows in
the stadium. Each row being composed of an equal number of bodies. At the beginning,
they are all aligned. At the smallest time duration, row A stays, row B moves to the right
one space unit, while row Γmoves to the left one space unit. T o row B, row Γactually
moves two space units. It means, there should be time duration that Γmoves one space
unit relative to B. And it is the half time of the smallest duration. Since the smallest
duration is atomic, it involves the conclusion that half a given time is equal to that time.
Figure 6.6: Moving rows paradox
Zeno’s paradoxes are easy to understand. However, the conclusion is surprising. In
our common sense, motion and time are so real. Achilles must be able to catch up the
tortoise. However, it is hard to solve Zeno’s paradox. F rom Aristotle to Bertrand Russel,
from Archimedes to Herman W eyl, all proposed varies of solutions to Zeno’s paradoxes[ 60].
Zeno was ancient Greek philosopher. He was born in Elea, which was a Greek colony
located in present-day southern Italy . Little is known for certain about Zeno’s life. In
the dialogue of Parmenides, Plato describes a visit to Athens by Zeno and Parmenides,
at a time when Parmenides is “about 65”, Zeno is “nearly 40”, and Socrates is “a very
young man” . Assuming an age for Socrates of around 20 and taking the date of Socrates’
birth as 469 BC gives an approximate date of birth for Zeno of 490 BC. Some less reliable
details of Zeno’s life are given by Diogenes Laërtius in his Lives and Opinions of Eminent
Philosophers . It said Zeno was the adopted son of Parmenides. He was skilled to argue
both sides of any question, the universal critic. And that he was arrested and perhaps
killed at the hands of a tyrant of Elea[ 8].
Zeno was the primary member of the Eleatics, which were a pre-Socratic school of
philosophy founded by Parmenides in the early fifth century BC in the ancient town of
Elea. It’s another important school after Pythagoras. The Eleatics rejected the epistemological validity of sense experience, and instead took logical standards of clarity and182 CHAPTER 6. INFINITY
necessity to be the criteria of truth. Of the members, Parmenides and Melissus built
arguments starting from sound premises. Zeno, on the other hand, primarily employed
the reductio ad absurdum, attempting to destroy the arguments of others by showing
that their premises led to contradictions. Zeno is best known for his paradoxes, which
Bertrand Russell described as “immeasurably subtle and profound” .
Zeno of Elea, About 490BC - 425BC
Ancient Chinese philosophers developed equivalents to some of Zeno’s paradoxes.
F rom the surviving Mohist School of Names book of logic which states, in the archaic
ancient Chinese script, “a one-foot stick, every day take away half of it, in a myriad ages
it will not be exhausted. ”
Zeno’s paradoxes caused deep confusion to the ancient Greeks. The views about
time, space, infinity , continuity , and movement are critical to the later philosophers and
mathematicians even today . How to understand infinity , became a problem that must be
solved by ancient Greek philosophers.
