# (6, 1, 2) Method of exhaustion and calculus

6.1.2 Method of exhaustion and calculus . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 184
6.1.2 Method of exhaustion and calculus
Some other ancient Greek mathematicians took the practical approach about infinity .
They developed the method of exhaustion and made surprising achievements.
The idea of exhaustion originated in the late 5th Century BC with Antiphon (About
480BC - 410BC), when he tried to solve one of the three classic geometric problems,
square the circle3. T o approximate the area of a circle, Antiphon started from an inscribed
square, then repeatedly double the number of the sides to obtain octagons, hexagons...
As the area of the circle gradually “exhausts”, the side length of inscribed polygons gets
smaller and smaller. Antiphon thought the polygon would eventually coincide with the
circle. This is the idea of exhaustion. The method was made rigorous a few decades later
by Eudoxus of Cnidus, who used it to calculate areas and volumes. The correctness of
3The other two are trisecting the angle, and doubling the cube. Given a circle, ancient Greeks attempted to seek the solution to draw a square that has the same area with only straightedge and compass.
Many mathematicians attempted to solve this problem, but all failed until Galois developed theory to
prove they were all impossible in 19th Century .6.1. THE INFINITY CONCEPT 185
this method relies on the famous axiom of Eudoxus-Archimedes (or simply called axiom
of Archimedes).
Axiom 6.1.1. Axiom of Archimedes Given two magnitudes aandb, there exists some
natural number n, such that anb.
Axiom of Archimedes is fundamental. W e introduced Euclid algorithm to compute the
greatest common measurement in chapter 2, however, we did not show if this algorithm
always terminates. With axiom of Archimedes, we can prove that Euclid algorithm always
terminates. Eudoxus stated “Given two different magnitudes, for the larger one, subtract
a magnitude larger than its half, then for the remaining, subtract another magnitude
larger than its half, repeat this process, there must be some remaining less than the
smaller one. ” This is the logic behind the method of exhaustion.
By using the method of exhaustion, Eudoxus proved that: the volume of a pyramid
is one-third the volume of a prism with the same base and altitude, and the volume of a
cone is one-third that of the corresponding cylinder. These statements are summarized
as propositions in the book 12 of Euclid’s Elements [8].
Archimedes greatly developed the method of exhaustion, and achieved the highest
level amazing result. He calculated π, proved the formulas of circular area, surface area
and volume of sphere, cone, and even found the method to calculate the area under the
parabola curve. He was said to be the god of the mathematics in ancient Greece.
The Fields Medal carries a portrait
of Archimedes.Archimedes (287BC - 212 BC) was a Greek
mathematician, physicist, engineer, inventor, and
astronomer. He was born in the seaport city of
Syracuse, at that time a self-governing colony in
Magna Graecia. Archimedes might have studied in
Alexandria, Egypt in his youth. During his lifetime,
Archimedes made his work known through correspondence with the mathematicians in Alexandria.
Although few details of his life are known, he is
considered the greatest mathematician of antiquity
and one of the greatest of all time. various popular
stories about him are widely circulated.
The most widely known anecdote about
Archimedes tells of how he uncovered a fraud in
the manufacture of a golden crown commissioned
by King Hiero II of Syracuse. The king had supplied the pure gold to be used, and
Archimedes was asked to determine whether some silver had been substituted by the
dishonest goldsmith. Archimedes had to solve the problem without damaging the crown,
so he could not melt it down into a regularly shaped body in order to calculate its density . While taking a bath, he noticed that the level of the water in the tub rose as he
got in, and realized that this effect could be used to determine the volume of the crown.
Archimedes then took to the streets naked, so excited by his discovery that he had forgotten to dress, yelling “Eureka!” (Greek word meaning “I have found [it]!”). The test
was conducted successfully , proving that silver had indeed been mixed in. His discovery
is the “Archimedes’ Principle” that every middle school student must learn. Eureka was
later used to describe the moment when inspiration was found.
In 214BC, the Second Punic W ar Broke out. Legend has it that Archimedes created
a giant parabolic mirror to deflect the powerful Mediterranean sun onto the ship’s sails,
setting fire to them. Archimedes also created a huge crane operated hook ⚶the Claw of
Archimedes ⚶that was used to lift the enemy ships out of the sea before dropping them
to their doom. After two-year-long siege, In 212 BC, the Romans captured Syracuse.
The Roman force commander, Marcellus had ordered that Archimedes, the well-known186 CHAPTER 6. INFINITY
mathematician should not be killed. Archimedes, who was now around 78 years of age,
continued his studies after the breach by the Romans and while at home, his work was
disturbed by a Roman soldier. The last words attributed to Archimedes are “Do not
disturb my circles!” The soldier killed Archimedes despite orders that Archimedes should
not be harmed. 137 years after his death, the Roman orator Cicero described visiting the
tomb of Archimedes. It was surmounted by a sphere and a cylinder, which Archimedes
had requested be placed on his tomb to represent his mathematical discoveries4.
As an example, let us see how Archimedes calculated πwith the method of exhaustion
around 250BC. Symbol πrepresents the ratio of a circle’s circumference to its diameter,
sometimes it’s referred to as Archimedes’ constant.
As shown in figure 6.10 , Archimedes drew two regular polygons inside and outside
a circle with diameter of 1. F or a side of the inscribed polygon and the corresponding
arc, the length of the arc is greater than the side because the straight line is the shortest
between two points. Hence the circumference of the circle is greater than the inscribed
polygon. Similarly , we can reason that the circumference of the circle is less than the
circumscribed polygon. Since the diameter is 1, the circle’s circumference equals to π.
Hence the below relation holds:
Ci<π<C o
Figure 6.10: πcan be estimated by computing the perimeters of circumscribed and inscribed polygons.
WhereCiandCoare the circumferences of the inscribed and circumscribed polygons
respectively . Successively increasing the number of sides approximates the range of π.
Archimedes calculated the 96-sided regular polygon, he proved that223
71<π<22
7(that
is3.1408<π< 3.1429 ). This upper bound of22
7is widely used in western. The Chinese
mathematician Zu Chongzhi, around 480AD, calculated that 3.1415926<π< 3.1415927
and suggested the approximations π355
113= 3.14159292035 ... by applying to a 12,288sided polygon. This value remained the most accurate approximation of πfor the next
800 years.
The method of exhaustion, developed in ancient time has limitation. Although rigorous, it demands specific approach for different problems. As a precursor to the methods
of calculus, it’s complex. Partially because ancient Greeks rejected irrational numbers,
they had to make difference between geometric magnitudes and numbers. Another reason
was because they attempted to avoid using infinity and infinitesimal.
Ptolemy , the ancient Greek mathematician, astronomer, and geographer also made
great achievement with the method of exhaustion. He developed a geocentric model to
calculate the celestial motions. It was almost universally accepted until the scientific
4A sphere has 2/3 the volume and surface area of its circumscribing cylinder including its bases.6.1. THE INFINITY CONCEPT 187
revolution. His Planetary Hypotheses presented a physical realization of the universe as
a set of nested spheres, in which he used the epicycles of his planetary model to compute
the dimensions of the universe. He estimated the Sun was at an average distance of 1,210
Earth radii, while the radius of the sphere of the fixed stars was 20,000 times the radius
of the Earth.
After Hellenistic period, the Greek civilization was destroyed by several forces. The
Romans conquered Greece, Egypt, and the Near East. In 47BC, the Romans set fire to the
Egyptian ships in the harbor of Alexandria; the fire spread and burned the library – the
most expensive ancient libraries. The emperor Theodosius (ruled 379 - 396) proscribed
the pagan religions and in 392 ordered that their temples be destroyed, including the
temple of Serapis in Alexandria, which housed the only remaining sizable collection of
Greek works. Thousands of Greek books were burned by the Romans. Many other works
written on parchment were expunged to rewrite Christianity works.
The final blow to the Greek civilization was the conquest of Egypt by the uprising
Arab empire in 640. The remaining books were destroyed on the ground that as Omar,
the conqueror, put it, “Either the books contain what we also have, in which case we
don’t have to read them, or they contain the opposite of what we believe, in which case
we must not read them. ” And so for six months the baths of Alexandria were heated by
burning rolls of parchment[ 4].
When read about such history , it always makes people sad and sigh. The tragedy of
burning books in South America, in the Qin Empire, has been performed ever since ancient
times. After capture of Egypt, the majority of the scholars migrated to Constantinople,
which had become the capital of the Eastern Roman Empire. The Arabs absorbed the
Greek works, translated and commented extensively to Greek knowledge. The ‘House of
Wisdom’ in Baghdad gradually became the academy centre in the world. After Medieval,
Europeans translated the ancient Greek works from Arabic to Latin. Along with the
Renaissance in Europe, not only arts and culture, but also mathematics and philosophy
recovered and were greatly developed.
German astronomer Johannes Kepler took the next important step after Archimedes
atop method of exhaustion. When Nicolaus Copernicus began to think astronomy , the
Ptolemaic theory had become somewhat more complicated. T o explain the variations
in speed and direction of the apparent motions, Ptolemy added epicycles, and other
complex geometric tricks in his model. In Copernicus’ time, the theory required a total
of 78 circles to describe the motion of Sun, Moon, and the five planets. By moving the
Sun to the centre, Copernicus was able to reduce the total number of circles (differents
and epicycles) to 34. It was greatly simplified from the geocentric model. Kepler made
more remarkable achievement. He inherited valuable observation data from the famous
astronomer Tycho Brahe. He spent 8 years to analyze the observed data and false trails.
Kepler’s most famous and important results are known today as Kepler’s three laws of
planetary motion. According to his first law, Kepler broke with the tradition of two
thousand years that circle or sphere must be used to describe celestial motions. It states
that each planet moves on an ellipse and that the sun is at one (common) focus of each
of these elliptical paths. The other radical step Kepler made was he discovered that the
planet does not move at a constant velocity . A line segment joining a planet and the Sun
sweeps out equal areas during equal intervals of time. This is his second law. It explains
that why a planet some times moves fast (close to the Sun) while some times moves slowly
(far from the Sun). The third law states that, the square of the orbital period of a planet is
directly proportional to the cube of the semi-major axis of its orbit. Such complex models
required more powerful mathematical tool, the method of exhaustion is not convenient.
Kepler then made simplification, and he used the new method on measuring the volume
of containers such as wine barrels.
The next important step was made by Descartes and F ermat. Through analytical188 CHAPTER 6. INFINITY
geometry , numbers and geometry were bridged, and finally evolved to calculus by Issac
Newton and Gottfried Whilhelm Leibniz. Infinitesimal is the central concept in calculus,
and the integration involved sum of infinitely many such quantities. As a side word, John
W allis, the important contributor to calculus, introduced 1 symbol for infinity in 1665.
Although the logic foundation of calculus caused hotly debating, this new tool, representing the modern spirit of the western, broke the waves in its sail in the 18th Century .
This was an era of heroes. The Bernoulli family , Euler, and Lagrange greatly developed
calculus and infinite series, solved many hard problems in astronomy , mechanics, and
fluid that people never imagined before.
