# (6, 1, 1) Potential infinity and actual infinity

6.1.1 Potential infinity and actual infinity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 182
6.1.1 Potential infinity and actual infinity
Aristotle studied Zeno’s paradoxes deeply . One of the most important contributions
that Aristotle had made to to study of infinity is identifying a dichotomy between what
Aristotle calls the potential infinite and the actual infinite . This work fundamentally
influenced the later development of mathematics[ 8]. Potential infinity is a process that
never stops. It can be a group of “things” that continues without terminating, going on
or repeating itself over and over again with no recognizable ending point. The obvious
example is the group of natural numbers. No matter where you are while listing or
counting out natural numbers, there always exists another number to proceed. Also, in
Euclid geometry , a line with a starting point could extend on without end, but could still
be potentially infinite because one can add on more length to a finite length to allow it
to extend2. The actual infinite involves never-ending sets or “things” within a space that
has a beginning and end; it is a series that is technically “completed” but consists of an
infinite number of members. According to Aristotle, actual infinities cannot exist because
they are paradoxical. It is impossible to say that you can always “take another step” or
“add another member” in a completed set with a beginning and end, unlike a potential
infinite. It is ultimately Aristotle ns rejection of the actual infinite that allowed him to
refute Zeno ns paradox.
Although Aristotle did disprove the existence of the actual infinite finally , and tended
to reject a lot of major concepts in mathematics, the importance of mathematics was
still never belittled in Aristotle ns eyes. Aristotle argued that actual infinity as it is
2Euclid avoided to use the term ‘infinitely extend’ in his work. instead he said a line can be extended
any long as needed. This is a common treatment in ancient Greece.6.1. THE INFINITY CONCEPT 183
not applicable to geometry and the universal, is not relevant to mathematics, making
potential infinity all that actually is important.
Aristotle’s viewpoint to infinity is typical in ancient Greece. The dichotomy and
controversy about potential infinity and actual infinity have been influential till today .
Despite of these arguments, the ancient Greek mathematicians achieved amazing result
with the potential infinity concept. One success story was that Euclid proved there are
infinitely many prime numbers. It is considered one of the most beautiful proofs in history .
Proposition 6.1.1 (Euclid’s Elements, Book IX, Proposition 20) .Prime numbers are
more than any assigned multitude of prime numbers[ 11].
Euclid indented to avoid using term like ‘infinitely many’ when stated this proposition.
Such treatment is very common in Elements . It’s famous that Euclid uses reduction to
absurdity in his proof. W e explain it in modern language.
Proof. Suppose there are finite prime numbers p1,p2,...,p n. Euclid makes a new number:
p1p2...pn+ 1
Which is the product of the nprime numbers plus one. It is either prime or not.
• If it is prime, definitely , it does not equal to any one from p1topn, hence it’s a new
prime not in the list;
• If it is not prime, then it must have a prime factor p. However, no one from p1to
pndivides this number. It means pis different from any one from p1topn, hence
it’s a new prime beyond those in the list.
In both cases, we obtain a new prime number. It contradicts the assumption that
there are finite prime numbers. Therefore, there are infinitely many prime numbers.
F rom today’s view point, Euclid obtained a kind of indirect ‘proof of existence’ . By
using proof by contradiction, he proved there are infinitely many prime numbers, but did
not give a way to list them. It is quite natural in mathematical proofs now. However, it
led to hotly debating about the fundamentals of mathematics in the late 19th and early
20th Century . W e’ll return to this topic in next chapter.
Aristotle, 384BC - 322BC
Aristotle was a great philosopher and polymath in ancient Greece. Along with his
teacher Plato, he has been called the ‘F ather of W estern Philosophy’ . Little is known
about his life. Aristotle was born in the city of Stagira in Northern Greece in 384BC.
His father died when Aristotle was a child, and he was brought up by a guardian. At the
age of seventeen or eighteen, he joined Plato’s Academy in Athens and remained there184 CHAPTER 6. INFINITY
for 20 years until Plato died. This period of study in Plato’s Academy deeply influenced
Aristotle’s life. Socrates was Plato’s teacher, and Aristotle was taught by Plato. He soon
became an outstanding scholar, and Plato called him “the Spirit of the Academy” . But
Aristotle is not a man who only admires authority without his own opinions. He studied
hard, and even established a library for himself.
Shortly after Plato died around 347BC, Aristotle left Athens. The traditional story
about his departure records that he was disappointed with the Academy’s direction after
control passed to Plato’s nephew. After that, he traveled around. In 343 BC, Aristotle
was invited by Philip II of Macedon to become the tutor to his 13 years old son Alexander.
Aristotle was appointed as the head of the royal academy of Macedon. During Aristotle’s
time in the Macedonian court, he gave lessons not only to Alexander, but also to two
other future kings: Ptolemy and Cassander. It was under the influence of Aristotle that
Alexander the Great cared about science and respected knowledge.
In 335BC, Philip II died. Aristotle returned to Athens, establishing his own school
there known as the Lyceum. Aristotle conducted courses at the school for the next twelve
years. In this period in Athens, between 335 and 323 BC, Aristotle composed many of his
works. He studied and made significant contributions to logic, metaphysics, mathematics,
physics, biology , botany , ethics, politics, agriculture, medicine, dance and theatre. There
was legend that Aristotle had a habit of walking while lecturing along the walkways
covered with colonnades. It was for this reason that his school was named “Peripatetic”
(an ancient Greek word, which means “of walking” or “given to walking about”). Aristotle
used the language that was much more obscure than Plato’s Dialogue. Many of his works
are based on lecture notes, and some are even the notes of his students. Aristotle was
considered as the first author of textbooks in the western world.
F ollowing Alexander’s death, anti-Macedonian sentiment in Athens was rekindled. In
322 BC, his enemies reportedly denounced Aristotle for impiety , prompting him to flee
to his mother’s family estate in Euboea. He said: “I will not allow the Athenians to sin
twice against philosophy” ⚶a reference to Athens’s trial and execution of Socrates. He
died on Euboea of natural causes later that same year, at the age of 63.
More than 2300 years after his death, Aristotle remains one of the most influential
people who ever lived. He contributed to almost every field of human knowledge in
ancient time, and he was the founder of many new fields. Among countless achievements,
Aristotle was the founder of formal logic, pioneered the study of zoology , and left every
future scientist and philosopher in his debt through his contributions to the scientific
method.
