# (6, 3) Explore the actual infinity

6.3 Explore the actual infinity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 193
6.3 Explore the actual infinity
Aristotle’s influence was profound. F or more than two thousand years, mathematicians
and philosophers had been thinking about concept of infinity . Most of them accepted the
potential infinity . However, there were discordant views about actual infinity . F or a long
time, people believed the actual infinity was God, or only God mastered actual infinity .
Many attempts to reason the actual infinity led to confusion and contradict result. Let
all the natural numbers be actual infinity for example. Because natural numbers are
separated by even numbers and odd numbers. They alternate in turns. It’s natural to
think that all even numbers are half of all natural numbers. However, doubling every
natural number gives an even number; and dividing every even number by 2 gives a
natural number vise versa. There is one to one correspondence between all the natural
numbers and even numbers. Are these two actual infinities same? If not, which one has
more? natural numbers or even numbers?
F ather of the modern science, Galileo Galilei made a similar paradox in his final
scientific work Two New Sciences in 1636. Some numbers are squares, while others are
not; therefore, all the numbers, including both squares and non-squares, must be more
numerous than just the squares. And yet, for every number there is exactly one square,
which forms the sequence 1, 4, 9, 16, 25, ... hence, there cannot be more of one than of
the other. This paradox is known as Galileo’s paradox.
Not only numbers, people found similar paradox in Geometry . As shown in figure
6.12 , F or two circles with the same centre, every radius connects two points in each circle
respectively , hence, there is one to one correspondence between the points in the bigger
circle and the smaller circle. It indicates there are same many points in each circle.
However, our common sense tells there must be more points in the bigger one.
Figure 6.12: Every point in the big circle is corresponding to a point in the small circle.
Because of these paradoxes, people accepted Aristotle’s approach to avoid using actual
infinity . Galileo concluded that the ideas of less, equal, and greater couldn’t apply to
infinite sets like natural numbers. People rejected terms of actual infinity , like “all the
natural numbers” .
About two hundred years after Galileo, German mathematician Cantor led people
broke into the Kingdom of infinity . F rom these paradoxes, Cantor thought the key problem was our common sense assumption, that the whole must be larger than the part. Is
it necessarily right? The development of modern science taught us our common view to
things could be incomplete or wrong. The theory of relativity challenges our understanding to space and time – the space we are living in is not necessarily the Euclidean space;
Quantum mechanics challenges our common sense that the world is causal – randomness
rules the quantum world. When think out of the box, it will open up a new world we’ve
never seen, resulting in fundamental development. This was exactly what Cantor did. If
we accept the counter-intuitive result, that ‘the part can equal to the whole’, then the
door to the infinity is open. He established the importance of one-to-one correspondence
between the members of two sets, and defined (actual) infinite sets.194 CHAPTER 6. INFINITY
Georg Cantor, 1845-1918T o compare two sets, Cantor defines if there is
one to one correspondence between them, that every element in set M has the unique corresponding
element in set N, then the two sets are equinumerous. They have the same size or have the same
number of elements5, denotingM=N. F or finite
sets, it is true obviously; when extends to infinite
sets, it means there are same infinite many even
numbers as the natural numbers! there are same
infinite many square numbers as natural numbers;
the points in smaller circle and the bigger circle
of the same centre are equinumerous... Cantor’s
friend, Richard Dedekind even gave such a definition6of infinite set in 1888: if some proper subset of
a set is equinumerous to this set, then it is a infinite
set.
