# (6, 3, 1) Paradise of infinite kingdom

6.3.1 Paradise of infinite kingdom . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 194
6.3.1 Paradise of infinite kingdom
Let us have a glance view of the garden in infinite kingdom. David Hilbert told an
interesting story in a lecture in 1924 (published in 2013) to help people understanding
Cantor’s infinite sets. It was popularized through George Gamow’s 1947 book One Two
Three... Infinity .
In this story , there is a Grand hotel with infinite many rooms. It is fully occupied
during the hot season. One evening, a tired driver has passed many “No vacany” hotels
before reaching to this one. He goes to see if there might nonetheless be a room for him.
The clerk, Hilbert said: “No problem, we can make a room for you. ” He moved the guest
in room 1 to room 2, then moved the guest in room 2 to room 3, and moved the guest
in room 3 to room 4, ... He moved every one from current room to the next room. That
freed up the first room for this new guest.
The story goes on. On the second day , there comes a tour group of infinite many
guests. Hilbert said: “No problem, we can make rooms for every one. ” He moved the new
guest who was in room 1 last night to room 2, then moved the guest in room 2 to room 4,
and moved the guest in room 3 to room 6, ... He moved every one in room ito room 2i.
Since the hotel has infinite many rooms, after moving, room 2, 4, 6, ... these even number
rooms are occupied with the guests accommodated yesterday , while the room 1, 3, 5, ...
these odd number rooms are freed up. There are infinite many odd numbers rooms that
can accommodate every member in the tour group.
The story does not end. On the third day , there comes infinite many tour groups of
infinite many guests each. Can the magic Hilbert’s hotel accommodate them all? Before
seeing the answer, let us first revisit the story on the first two days.
Figure 6.14: First day of Hilbert’s Grand hotel
5Remind the ‘isomorphic’ concept introduced in chapter 3.
6known as Dedekind infinite set.6.3. EXPLORE THE ACTUAL INFINITY 195
As shown in figure 6.14 , on the first day , we move every guest to the next room to free
up room 1. Essentially , we establish a 1-to-1 correspondence for shadowed circles between
the two rows as n$n+ 1 . It reveals a counterintuitive fact that infinity plus one is
infinity again. Hilbert’s grand hotel can accommodate not only this one more guest, but
also finite many knew guests by repeating this arrangement ktimes. It means:
1+ 1 =1
1+k=1
Figure 6.15: Second day of Hilbert’s Grand hotel
The solution for the second day is shown in figure 6.15 . W e essentially establish a
1-to-1 correspondence between natural numbers and even numbers, hence free up infinite
many odd number rooms. Then we establish another 1-to-1 correspondence between these
empty rooms and the infinite many guests in the tour group, which is exactly the 1-to-1
correspondence between odd numbers and natural numbers. The second day story tells
us, infinity plus infinity is infinity again.
1+1=1
It’s natural to ask, although the symbols are same, does the infinity on the left hand
equal to the infinity on the right hand? Can we compare between infinities for size?
W e’ll see later, it was exactly this question, led Cantor to study infinity in depth. In
Hilbert’s Grand hotel story , we can establish 1-to-1 correspondence between all these
infinities, hence they are all equinumerous. Such infinity that has 1-to-1 correspondence
with natural numbers are called ‘countable infinity’ .
T o solve the problem on the third day of Hilbert’s Grand hotel, we need think about
how to establish the 1-to-1 correspondence between the infinite many tour groups of
infinity many guests and the infinity many rooms. One may come to the idea to arrange
the guests in the first tour group to room 1, 2, 3, ... then arrange the guests in the
second group to room 1+ 1 ,1+ 2 , ... However, this method does not work. W e don’t
know which one are more numerous, the rooms or the guests before the arrangement.
Consider how this process executes. The first guest in the second group will never know
when the first group finishes accommodating, this guest has no way to determine which
room should move to. Compare with the first day story , the new guest could immediately
move to room 1 when the original guest moved to room 2, although the whole infinity
accommodating process is endless. Same situation happened on the second day . When
the original guest in room 1 moved to room 2, the first guest in the tour group could
move to the freed up room 1 immediately . Next the original guest in room 2 moved to
room 4, and the guest in room 3 moved to room 6, at this time, the second guest in the
tour group could move to room 3...
Figure 6.16 gives a numbering solution. F or convenient purpose, we label the first
guest 0, the second guest 1, the third guest 2, ... W e label the guests already lived in the196 CHAPTER 6. INFINITY
0 1 2 3 4 512345
0 123
4
5 678910
Figure 6.16: One solution to number the infinity of infinity
hotel as group 0, the first tour group 1, the second group 2, ... In this figure, every guest
corresponds to a grid point. W e also label the hotel rooms from 0.
Now we arrange rooms in this order: assign the guest 0 in group 0 to room 0, the guest
1 in group 0 to room 1, the guest 0 in group 1 to room 2, the guest 0 in group 2 to room
3, the guest 1 in group 1 to room 4, ... Along the zig-zag path, we can assign room one
by one, without missing any guests. Hence we establish a 1-to-1 correspondence between
every guest in these infinite many groups and the infinity many rooms. Hilbert’s Grand
hotel surprisingly holds ‘two-dimensional’ infinity7.
Exercise 6.3
1. W e establish the 1-to-1 correspondence between the rooms and guests with the
numbering scheme shown in 6.16 . F or guest iin groupj, which room number
should be assigned? Which guest in which group will live in room k?
2. F or Hilbert’s Grand hotel, there are multiple solutions for the problem on the third
day . Figure 6.17 is the cover page of the book Proof without word . Can you give
a numbering scheme based on this figure?
Figure 6.17: F rom cover page of Proof without word
7The traditional solution uses the Euclid’s theorem, that there are infinite many prime numbers.
Empty the odd numbered rooms by sending the guest in room ito room 2i, then put the first group’s
guests in rooms 3n, the second group’s guests in rooms 5n, ... put the k-th group’s guests in rooms pn,
where pis the k-th prime number. This solution leaves certain rooms empty , specifically , all odd numbers
that are not prime powers, such as 15 or 847, will no longer be occupied.6.3. EXPLORE THE ACTUAL INFINITY 197
