# (6, 3, 5) T ransfinite numbers and continuum hypothesis

6.3.5 T ransfinite numbers and continuum hypothesis . . . . . . . . . . . 208
T ransfinite numbers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 208
Continuum hypothesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 211
6.3.5 T ransfinite numbers and continuum hypothesis
On the way to find more numerous infinity , Cantor firstly considered power set. F or a
given setA, power set is the set of all possible subsets of A. F or example A=fa,bg, then
its power set contains fϕ,fag,fbg,fa,bgg, total four elements. F or a set of 3 elements, its
power set contains 8 subsets. Generally , for a set of nelements, because every element
can be select or skip when building a subset, the size of its power set is 2n. It’s obvious
that power set has a greater cardinality than the original finite set.
Cantor proved in 1891, that even for any infinite set, the power set has a strict greater
cardinality than the original set. This result is called Cantor’s theorem nowadays. The
proof is not hard, we put it in the appendix of this chapter. This theorem is the key
to open the door to infinite of infinite world. Cantor introduced notation @0for the
cardinality of countable infinite set, like natural numbers. @is the first Hebrew letter.
The cardinality of the power set for countable infinite set is 2ℵ0. According to Cantor’s
theorem,@0<2ℵ0, on top of that, we can repeatedly use power set to generate greater
and greater infinities.
@0,2ℵ0,22ℵ0,... (6.1)
T ransfinite numbers
Cantor named the series of leveled infinite cardinal numbers as transfinite cardinal numbers . The story of Hilbert Grand hotel, actually demonstrates the arithmetic rules of
transfinite numbers like @0+ 1 =@0,@0+k=@0,@0+@0=@0, ...
Besides power set, Cantor found another method to generate greater infinities. T o
understand this method, we need introduce the concept of ordinal number. It is defined
recursively as below:
1. 0 is an ordinal number;
2. Ifais an ordinal number, then a[fagis also an ordinal number, denoted a+ 1 . It
is called the successor of a;
3. IfSis a set of ordinals (its elements are all ordinal numbers), then [Sis an ordinal
number;
4. Any ordinal number is obtained from the above 3 steps.
F rom this definition, we can list the first several ordinal numbers from 0 as the following:
0
1 = 0[f0g
2 = 1[f1g= 0[f0g[f 0[f0gg
3 = 2[f2g= 1[f1g[f 1[f1gg=...
...
Where[Sis the union of all its elements, sometimes called as infinitary union . According to the first two items in the definition of ordinals, the natural numbers 0, 1, 2,
3, ...,n, ... are all ordinals. Let ω be the set of natural numbers, because all natural
numbers are ordinals, hence ωis a set of ordinals. Consider its infinitary union:
[ω=f0,1,2,...g=ω6.3. EXPLORE THE ACTUAL INFINITY 209
According to the third item in ordinal definition, ω is also an ordinal. It is a limit
ordinal11, and is the smallest infinite ordinal. W e can append it to the end of natural
numbers to form a new series:
0,1,2,...,ω
Start from ω, repeatedly applying the second item in ordinal definition, gives a new
ordinal series:
ω+ 1,ω+ 2,ω+ 3,...,ω +n,...
Combine the above two series into one set, denoted as ω2. Its infinitary union is
[ω2 =ω2, henceω2is also an ordinal, and it is a limit ordinal. F rom ω2, repeat
the above process, we obtain an infinite of infinite ordinal series:
0,1,2,...,n,...
ω,ω + 1,ω+ 2,...,ω +n,...
ω2,ω2 + 1,ω2 + 2,...,ω2 +n,...
...
ωk,ωk+ 1,ωk+ 2,...,ωk+n,...
...
ω2,ω2+ 1,ω2+ 2,...,ω2+n,...
...
ω3,ω3+ 1,ω3+ 2,...,ω3+n,...
...
ωω,ωω+ 1,ωω+ 2,...,ωω+n,...
...(6.2)
Except the first row is natural numbers, all the others are infinite ordinals, and the
first one in every row is the limit ordinal. F or the ordinals obtained by this method, they
are far from what people could imagined before. It extends the natural numbers to a
kingdom of infinite ordinals. What’s more surprising, these ordinals are all countable!
As a set, it has 1-to-1 correspondence with natural numbers. W e’ll soon see, there exist
uncountable ordinals, further, there exit greater and greater infinite ordinal series one by
one.
Among these infinite ordinals, which one is the best as the cardinal number for infinite
countable set? It’s natural to select the smallest limit ordinal ω. Let’s give the formal
definition for cardinal number:
Definition 6.3.1. An ordinal ais a cardinal if there is no ordinal b<a witha=b.
In other words, ordinal ais a cardinal, if for any ordinal b < a , the cardinality of
bis less than the cardinality of a. This definition tell us every natural numbers nis a
cardinal, and ωis also a cardinal. When use the ordinal ωas cardinal, we write it as @0,
hence@0=ω. W e’ve shown to use @0as the cardinal for all infinite countable sets.
Exceptω, although all rest ordinals in series 6.2 are greater than ω, their cardinals
are same as ω(all equal to countable infinity). Hence they are not cardinals.
In order to obtain greater cardinals, we form a new set contains all ordinals in series
6.2 , denote it as ω1.
ω1=fajais ordinal, andjaj@ 0g
11A nonzero ordinal that is not a successor is called a limit ordinal.210 CHAPTER 6. INFINITY
Figure 6.23: Infinite ordinals
Wherejajis the cardinal of a12. W e can prove that ω1is a cardinal, and it is the
first uncountable cardinal. Then, we repeat this method, to expand a new infinite ordinal
series from ω1:
ω1,ω1+ 1,...,ω 12,...,ω2
1,...,ωω
1,...
All elements in this series have the same cardinality . The smallest one is ω1, which
also satisfies the cardinal definition. It is the second infinite cardinal @1=ω1. Using the
similar process to construct ω1, we can form another set:
ω2=fajais ordinal, andjaj@ 1g
It gives the third infinite cardinal @2=ω2. Repeat this method, we can obtain a series
of infinite cardinals. In summary , for any ordinal a, we can define the infinite cardinal
@a, then form a set:
ωa+1=fbjbis ordinal, andjbj@ ag
It gives a cardinal greater than @aas@a+1=ωa+1 . F or any ordinal a, there is a
infinite cardinal@a. All these cardinals also form a series:
@0,@1,@2,...,@n,...,@ω,... (6.3)
F rom left to right, these cardinals become greater and greater, and there are not any
other infinite cardinals between any two next @s. The infinite ordinals and infinite cardinals are also called transfinite ordinals and transfinite cardinals, or transfinite numbers as
a whole. Where will these more and more numerous transfinite numbers lead to? Cantor
thought it must be god.
People were surprised at transfinite numbers. Some praised Cantor’s amazing innovation opened up a new world we’ve never seen before; Others criticized transfinite
12T o be accurate, we should use other notation for the cardinal of A, like A, or # A, card (A), n(A)etc.6.3. EXPLORE THE ACTUAL INFINITY 211
numbers were “fog on fog”, Cantor was building a disease of mathematics need to be
cured. Although there was hotly debating, transfinite number was one of the most amazing achievement of thought in the 19th Century .
Continuum hypothesis
Cantor found two types of infinite cardinal series, one is power sets, the other is transfinite
cardinals:
@0,2ℵ0,22ℵ0,...
and
@0,@1,@2,...
@0is the cardinal of the infinite countable set. In previous section, we reasoned that,
@1is the next transfinite cardinals next to @0. However, according to Cantor’s theorem
of power set, we only know that 2ℵ0is more numerous than @0, but we do not know if it
is more or less numerous than @1. Cantor conjectured 2ℵ0=@1, that there wasn’t any
other transfinite cardinals between @0and 2ℵ0. Hence 2ℵ0is the first transfinite cardinal
more numerous than infinite countable set.
In 1847, Cantor proved 2ℵ0=C. It means all subsets of natural numbers and real
numbers have the same cardinality . Therefore, Cantor’s conjecture essentially states that,
there exists no set whose cardinality is strictly greater than that of natural numbers @0
and less than that of real numbers C. Because real numbers are often called continuum,
this conjecture is called Continuum Hypothesis , abbreviated as CH.
Continuum Hypothesis can be further extended. F or any ordinal a, whether 2ℵa=
@a+1 holds. This conjecture is called generalized continuum hypothesis, abbreviated as
GCH.
Cantor raised continuum hypothesis in a paper in 1878. He believed it to be true and
tried for many years to prove it. Sometimes he thought he had proved it false, then the
next day found his mistake. Again he thought he had proved it true only again to quickly
find his error. His inability to prove the continuum hypothesis caused him considerable
anxiety till his death in 1918.
The problem, whether we can prove continuum hypothesis true or false became the
first on David Hilbert’s list of 23 important open questions that was presented at the International Congress of Mathematicians in 1900 in Paris. The continuum hypothesis came
from the practical problems from geometry , mechanics, and physics. Hilbert expressed
this view:
But even this creative activity of pure thought is going on, the external
world once again reasserts its validity, and by thrusting new questions upon us
through the phenomena that occur, it opens up new domains of mathematical
knowledge.
Because the continuum hypothesis is the most central open problem at the foundation
of mathematical logic and axiomatic set theory , it has been studied by many great mathematicians for over hundred years. Although many significant progresses were made, it is
not completely resolved. Kurt Gödel proved in 1938 that the negation of the continuum
hypothesis, the existence of a set with intermediate cardinality , could not be proved in
standard set theory (also known as Zermelo-F raenkel axioms for set theory together with
the axiom of choice or AC. Informally , AC says that given any collection of non-empty
bins (even infinite), it is possible to make a selection of exactly one object from each bin.
we’ll introduce the details in next chapter). The second half of the independence of the212 CHAPTER 6. INFINITY
continuum hypothesis, unprovability of the nonexistence of an intermediate-sized set, was
proved in 1963 by Paul Cohen with a new powerful technique called forcing . There was
an interesting story said that Cohen, the young US mathematician was not sure about
his proof([ 8], pp. 280). He came to Princeton and knocked on Gödel’s house. Gödel was
struggling with paranoia at the time. He slightly open the door, such that Cohen could
pass his proof through. Then Cohen was shut out. T wo days later, Gödel invited Cohen
came in to drink tea, and finally accept his proof. Cohen was awarded a Fields Medal
the next year.
Gödel and Cohen proved, the continuum hypothesis is undecidable from ZFC set
theory . W e’ll explain more about undecidable statement in next chapter. Continuum
hypothesis is independence from the axioms in ZF system. Similar result also happens
to the axiom of choice. Gödel and Cohen’s result also tells that AC is undecidable from
ZF system. Accepting AC gives the consistent mathematical system; while rejecting AC
gives another consistent mathematical system. With the axiom of choice, accepting or
rejecting continuum hypothesis all gives consistent mathematics respectively . Continuum
hypothesis and the axiom of choice is independent to ZF set theory[ 61].
