# (6, 3, 4) Dedekind cut

6.3.4 Dedekind cut . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 206
6.3.4 Dedekind cut
In order to make the foundation of calculus rigorous, mathematicians in the 19th Century
went back to inspect the confusion concepts, like infinitesimal and infinite series, which
were developed and used by Newton, Leibniz, Jacobi, and Euler. Through the work of
Cauchy , W eierstrass and so on, the standard of rigour, including limit and convergence
were setup. However, there was still a critical problem remaining, the concept of real
numbers. The whole calculus is built on top of the continuity of real numbers, while it
was lack of a satisfied definition of real number. People thought rationals could present
line, but later found there were ‘gaps’ between rational numbers. It was not completeness
or continuous. While we demand line be completeness, continuous, without any gaps.
What is the exactly meaning of continuity of line?
When Dedekind was thinking how to teach differential and integral calculus, the idea
of Dedekind cut came to him on November 24, 1858. He kept developing this idea, and
published the result in 1872. Dedekind found although rationals were dense – for any
two rational numbers, no matter how they close to each other, there are other rational
numbers in between – they were not continuous. Consider a continuous number line, let
us use an infinitely thin knife, the knife of thought, to cut the line into two parts([ 8] pp.
196).
Because the line is continuous without any gaps, no matter how thin the knife, it
must cut at a point, but not pass through a gap. (for the line of rationals, but not real
numbers, then the knife may cut at a point, or may cut through a gap between two
rational numbers, for example, cutting at positionp
2.) Suppose cut at point A, then
A is either on the left, or on the right. It can not be on the both sides, or not be on6.3. EXPLORE THE ACTUAL INFINITY 207
neither side. This point can not be divided or disappeared. In other words, since line is
continuous, wherever it is cut into two parts, one must have an end point, while the other
not.
Dedekind defined a cut (A1,A2),A1is called ‘closed downwards’, and A2is ‘closed
upwards’ . Where all numbers in downwards A1is less than every number in upwards A2.
Such thatA1represents the left half line of the cut, and A2represents the right half. F or
any such a cut, either A1has a greatest number, or A2has a smallest number. There
must be one and only one case.
p
21
17
541
29
239
1691393
9853363
2378
577
40899
7017
123
2
2
1
Figure 6.22: Definep
2with Dedekind cut
When apply Dedekind cut to all rational numbers, we can find that rationals are not
continuous. F or example, A1contains all rational numbers less than or equal to 2, and
A2contains all rational numbers greater than 2, then this cut defines rational number 2.
However for the negative example: the downwards A1contains all rational numbers that
are negative, and the non-negative ones, but with their square less than or equal to 2;
The upwards A2contains the rest rational numbers. W e can find in this cut, there is no
greatest number in the downwards, while there is no smallest number in the upwards too.
It means there is a gap in rational numbers. When cut at this point, the knife will pass
through. This cut actually defines a new numberp
2, and it is not a rational number, as
shown in figure 6.22 .
Dedekind came to the idea that every real number rdivides the rational numbers
into two subsets, namely those greater than rand those less than r. Dedekind’s brilliant
idea was to represent the real numbers by such divisions of the rationals. Every cut of
a rationals defines a real number. The cut through a gap (no greatest in A1, and no
smallest in A2) is an irrational number; the cut at a point ( A1has the greatest, or A2
has the smallest) is a rational number. And real numbers contain both rationals and
irrationals. Hence Dedekind cut defines real numbers. Every point in the number line is
a real number. It also gives the foundation of the continuity of real numbers.
F rom Hippasus found the irrational number, till Dedekind finally defined real numbers, It takes people two thousands years10. In the method of Dedekind cut, we always
divide numbers into two finalized infinite parts, which are two infinite sets. This is the
development and practice of actual infinity concept.
10In the same year of 1872, W eierstrass defined irrational numbers as limits of convergent series; Cantor
also defined irrational numbers as convergent sequences of rational numbers. The theory of real numbers
hence were established through these different paths.208 CHAPTER 6. INFINITY
