# (6, 4) Infinity in art and music

6.4 Infinity in art and music . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 212
6.4 Infinity in art and music
Vincent van Gogh, The Starry Night , Museum of Modern Art, New Y ork
Along with the thought and exploration, infinity also inspired art and music when
people facing the vast galaxy , the sea, and the mystery nature.
Among the countless art about sky , the Starry Night by Dutch post-impressionist
artist, Vincent van Gogh is impressive. In his art work, V an Gogh’s night sky is a field of
roiling energy . Below the exploding stars, the village is a place of quiet order. Connecting
Earth and sky is the flame like cypress, a tree traditionally associated with graveyards
and mourning. V an Gogh said “Looking at the stars always makes me dream. ” He painted
in June, 1889, in the mental hospital at Saint-Rémy-de-Provence in F rance, just before
sunrise, with the addition of an idealized village. V an Gogh stayed there for 108 days.
During this period, he pictured about 150 oil canvas, and hundreds of sketches.
Snow Storm: Steam-Boat off a Harbour’s Mouth is a painting by English Romanticism
artist J.M.W T urner. The picture may recall a particularly bad storm in January , 1842.
In order to feel the power of sea, T urner got the sailors to tie him to the mast to observe.
“I was lashed for four hours. and I did not expect to escape, but I felt bound to record it
if I did. ” However, the critical response to the painting was largely negative at the time,
with one critic calling it “soapsuds and whitewash” . T urner said: “I did not paint it to6.4. INFINITY IN AR T AND MUSIC 213
Joseph Mallord William T urner, Snow Storm , 1842, T ate Modern, London UK
be understood, but I wished to show what such a scene was like. ” As time going, people
finally realized, as John Ruskin, the leading English art critic of the Victorian era said:
“It is one of the very grandest statements of sea-motion, mist and light, that has ever
been put on canvas. ”
The thought and study of infinity soon became a problem in philosophy and theology
from the concrete things in nature. In Ptolemy’s model, the universe is realized as a set
of nested spheres, with planets moving along them. The out most boundary is a sphere
of fixed stars. By the medieval, the church had largely accepted this model developed by
Aristotle and Ptolemy . People believed the Earth, created by God, was the centre of the
universe, and the stellar sphere was bounded.
A woodcut published in Paris in 1888, reflected how people understood the bounded
universe at that time. The original caption bellow the picture translated to: “A medieval
missionary (Bruno) tells that he has found the point where heaven and Earth meet... ” If
someone stands at the boundary of stellar sphere, can he raise his stick out to across the
boundary of universe? It’s hard to prevent him from doing that; but if he can, what is
the space out side the physical world? This was the paradox of the universe boundary .
T o solve it, scholars in medieval refactored Aristotle’s theory , and proposed an idea of
progressive boundary . Others believed, if throw a spear outside the world boundary ,
it would enlarge the universe. The world of matter is bounded, but the boundary is
surrounded by endless void.
During the Renaissance, artists adopted mathematics and science into their works.
Leonardo da Vinci had wide interest including architecture, anatomy , mathematics, and
engineering. He intended to use perspective disciplines, and experiment different aesthetic proportions in his works. German Renaissance artist Albrecht Dürer studied human proportions and the use of transformations to a coordinate grid to demonstrate facial
variation. His book F our Books on Measurement introduced both painting theory and
research on geometric and perspective principles. Johannes Kepler and Gérard Desargues
independently developed the concept of the “point at infinity” in projective geometry .
Desargues developed an alternative way of constructing perspective drawings by generalizing the use of vanishing points to include the case when these are infinitely far away .
He made Euclidean geometry , where parallel lines are truly parallel, into a special case
of an all-encompassing geometric system.
It’s the non-Euclidean geometry that brings a new view point to artists about infinity .
Euclidean geometry is named after the ancient Greek mathematician Euclid. It has been
the perfect example of axiom system and rigours reasoning for two thousand years. However, mathematicians addict to perfection continued questioning Euclid’s fifth postulate.214 CHAPTER 6. INFINITY
Camille Flammarion, L’Atmosphere: Météorologie Populaire (Paris, 1888), pp. 163.6.4. INFINITY IN AR T AND MUSIC 215
The first four are intuitive and obvious, for example: to draw a line from any point to any
point; all right angles are equal to one another. However the fifth postulate is disparate
complex. In Euclid’s original formulation: “If a straight line falls on two straight lines
in such a manner that the interior angles on the same side are together less than two
right angles, then the straight lines, if produced indefinitely , meet on that side on which
are the angles less than the two right angles. ” This postulate is also known as “parallel
postulate”, because it is essentially equivalent to a simpler statement: for any given line
and a point not on it, there is exactly one line through the point that does not intersect
the line. People doubted if this postulate could be deduced from the first four. Actually ,
the fifth postulate hasn’t been used in a large portion in Euclid’s Elements. Many mathematicians attempted to prove the fifth postulate in the past two thousand years, but all
failed. Italian mathematician Saccheri then tried to prove by contradiction. He assumed
the fifth postulate is false, but he obtained a series of obscure results. Saccheri believed
they were too strange, and Euclid’s fifth postulate must be true.
In 19th Century , German mathematician Carl F riedrich Gauss, Hungarian mathematician János Bolyai and the Russian mathematician Nikolai Ivanovich Lobachevsky
separately realized it’s not possible to establish such proof. Parallel postulate is independent to other postulates. And it can be replaced with other different “parallel postulate” . Gauss did not published his result, people found his finding after Gauss died
in 1885. Bolyai and Lobachevsky independently published treatises on non-Euclidean
geometry around 1830. In this new geometry (known as hyperbolic geometry nowadays),
Lobachevsky replaced Euclid’s postulate: in a plane, given a line and a point not on it,
there are multiple lines through a point that do not intersect the line. Then he developed
a whole set of consistent results. Many of them are different from Euclidean geometry .
F or example, in the new geometry , the inner angle of a triangle is less than two right
angles.
German mathematician Bernhard Riemann, in 1854 constructed another new geometry that was different from both Euclid and Lobachevsky . He founded the field of
Riemannian geometry , and the simplest of these is called elliptic geometry . It’s nonEuclidean due to its lack of parallel lines. It means every two lines must intersect in a
plane. In elliptic geometry , the inner angle of a triangle is greater than two right angles.
Eugenio Beltrami, in 1868, showed that Euclidean geometry and hyperbolic geometry
were equiconsistent so that hyperbolic geometry was logically consistent if and only if
Euclidean geometry was. In 1871, F elix Klein defined a metric method to describe the
non-Euclidean geometries. Klein’s influence has led to the current usage of the term
“non-Euclidean geometry” to mean either “hyperbolic” or “elliptic” geometry .
Non-Euclidean geometry brings us such possibility , that infinite space can be bounded.
Poincaré, in his popular science book Since and Hypothesis , described a interesting world.
The world is encapsulated in a infinite bounded sphere. The temperature at the centre
is very high. Along the distance away from the centre, the temperature decrease in
proportion. When arrive at the sphere surface, it decrease to absolute zero K. Let the
radii of the world sphere be R, for a point with the distance to the centre as r, then the
temperature is proportion to R2 r2. In this special world, due to thermal expansion,
object size is proportion to the temperature, the closer to the sphere boundary , the smaller.
Because of this, if a citizen moving towards the sphere, the temperature decreases lower
and lower. He also becomes smaller and smaller. The pace keeps slowing down. He
will never reach to the boundary of this world, although this world is bounded. What
Poincaré described is exactly a world ruled by a kind of hyperbolic geometries.
Inspired by Poincaré, the Dutch artist M.C Escher painted a series of woodcuts, called
circle limit to illustrate the bounded, infinite world. The angles, devils, and fishes all
become smaller and smaller when close to the edge of the circle, hence they will never
exceed this bounded, while infinite world.216 CHAPTER 6. INFINITY
M.C. Escher. Circle limit III, 1959
Not only in art, there are musics about infinity . In May , 1747, Johann Sebastian Bach
visited Sanssouci Palace in Postdam. King F rederick II invited Bach to try out his new
Silbermann pianos. Bach asked the King to give him a subject of F ugue, then immediately
executed it without any preparation to the astonishment of all present. After his return
to Leipzig, he composed the subject, which he had received from the King, in three and
six parts, added several artificial passages in strict canon to it, and had it engraved, under
the title of “Musical Offering” . He sent a copy to the King on July 7. This collection of
music is catalogued as BWV1079 nowadays. Among them there is a special piece with
title “Canon per T onos” . It is called endlessly rising canon. It pits a variant of the king n
s theme against a two-voice canon at the fifth. However, it modulates and finishes one
whole tone higher than it started out at. It thus has no final cadence. Douglas Hofstadter,
in his Pulitzer Prize book Gödel, Escher, Bach: An Eternal Golden Braid , wrote:
Part of the endlessly rising canon
It has three voices. The uppermost voice sings a variant of the Royal Theme, while
underneath it, two voices provide a canonic harmonization based on a second theme. The
lower of this pair sings its theme in C minor (which is the key of the canon as a whole), and
the upper of the pair sings the same theme displaced upwards in pitch by an interval of a
fifth. What makes this canon different from any other, however, is that when it concludesor, rather, seems to conclude-it is no longer in the key of C minor, but now is in D minor.6.5. APPENDIX - EXAMPLE PROGRAMS 217
Somehow Bach has contrived to modulate (change keys) right under the listener’s nose.
And it is so constructed that this ”ending” ties smoothly onto the beginning again; thus
one can repeat the process and return in the key of E, only to join again to the beginning.
These successive modulations lead the ear to increasingly remote provinces of tonality , so
that after several of them, one would expect to be hopelessly far away from the starting
key . And yet magically , after exactly six such modulations, the original key of C minor
has been restored! All the voices are exactly one octave higher than they were at the
beginning, and here the piece may be broken off in a musically agreeable way . Such,
one imagines, was Bach’s intention; but Bach indubitably also relished the implication
that this process could go on ad infinitum, which is perhaps why he wrote in the margin
”As the modulation rises, so may the King’s Glory . ” T o emphasize its potentially infinite
aspect[ 5].
Exercise 6.5
1. Light a candle between two opposite mirrors, what image can you see? Is it
potential or actual infinity?
