# (7, 1) Boundary of computation

7.1 Boundary of computation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 224
7.1 Boundary of computation
Gu Sen described the hesitated feelings when facing a long-running program in his popular
book F un of thinking : Will this program finish? Shall I wait or kill it? Is there a compiler
could tell if my program will run endlessly ([ 65] pp.228)?
Why not possible? It seems more realistic than time machine. W e may see
such a scene in a scientific film: a programmer typed something in the dark
screen, then hit enter. A highlighted, bold warning popped up immediately
“W arn: the program with the given input wil l run forever. Continue? (Y/N)”
If this became true one day, what fantastic cool things wil l you do? Do you
believe that I can make big money with it? I’l l firstly use it to prove the
Goldbach’s conjecture. I can write a program, enumerate al l even numbers
one by one, examine if it is the sum of two prime numbers. If yes, then check
the next even number, otherwise output the negative example and quit. The
next thing is to compile my program. Can ’t the compiler determine my program
terminates or not in advance? If the magic compiler warns me that my program
wil l run endlessly, haven ’t I proved Goldbach’s conjecture? Or if the compiler
tel ls me the program wil l terminate, doesn ’t it mean Goldbach’s conjecture is
falsehood? Either case, I’l l be the first one that solve the Goldbach’s conjecture,
and leave my name in mathematical history. What’s the next? I wil l modify
that program to explore the twin primes, then compile it to see if there are
real ly infinite many twin primes. And next, are there infinite many Mersenne
primes? This is also an open question in number theory for a long time. I can
easily solve it in this way. The 3x+ 1 conjecture? It’s a piece of cake to write
a “proof program” in a few minutes, then win the 500 dol lars prize offered by
Paul Erdős. There are enough mathematical open questions, I’l l never worry
about nothing to do. Martin LaBar in 1984 asked if a 33magic square can be
constructed with nine distinct square numbers. The award has accumulated to
100 dol lars, 100 euros, and a bottle of champagne. Search “Unsolved problems
in mathematics” from internet, filter in those about discrete things, and with
award, then write a few programs to solve them al l...
In 1936, the pioneer of computer science and artificial intelligence, Alan T uring proved
that, a general algorithm to determine an arbitrary computer program will finish running,
or continue to run forever, cannot exist. A key part of the proof was a mathematical
definition of a computer and program, which became known as a T uring machine. This
problem is called halting problem today .
W e can use reduction to absurdity method to prove the T uring’s halting problem.
Suppose there exists a algorithm halts (p), that can determine an arbitrary program p
terminates or not. First, we construct a never halting program:
forever () =forever ()
This is a infinitely recursive call. Then define a special program G as below1:
G() ={
halts (G) = T rue :forever ()
otherwise : halt
In program G, we utilize halts (G)to examine whether G itself will halt or not. If
it halts, then we call forever () to let it run forever. It exactly means G will not halt
1W e intend to use G for special meaning. It’s Gödel’s initial letter, exactly the same name for nondeterministic proposition in Gödel’s incompleteness theorem.7.2. RUSSEL’S P ARADOX 225
in this case, hence halts (G)should be false. However, according to the second clause,
it will halt. Therefore halts (G)should be true. whether halts (G)is true or false, we
obtain conflicted result. Hence our assumption can’t hold. There does not exit a general
algorithm to solve the halting problem for all possible program input.
There is another method to prove the halting problem in two steps([ 66] pp.268). Most
are same except that G accepts another argument p, it applies pto itself, then passes to
halts :
G(p) = ifhalts(p(p)) then forever() else 'Halted'
Let’s see what will happen when pass G to itselfG(G). Ifhalts (G(G)) returns true,
then it calls forever (), henceG(G)never finishes. While it exactly means halts (G(G))
should returns false, hence the program enters the else branch, and halts. But it again
meanshalts (G(G)) should return true. Whether halts or not, it leads to absurdity .
The halting problem clearly provides a incomputable problem, breaks the bubble of all
the above magic ideas. It reminds us the proof of Cantor’s theorem in previous chapter,
where we used quite similar method to prove that for all sets, including infinite sets, the
cardinals are strict less than their power sets. Actually , halting problem is closely related
to many interesting logic paradoxes.
