# (7, 2) Russel’s paradox

7.2 Russel’s paradox . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 225
7.2 Russel’s paradox
The history of paradox came back to ancient Greece. W e’ve introduced Zeno’s paradoxes
about infinity and continuity . Logic paradox is often an interesting problem, with strict
reasoning but deduced to conflicted result. About the fourth Century BC, the ancient
Greek philosopher Eubulides of Miletus raised a proposition: “I am lying. ” How to
determine if this declaration is true or false?
If this declaration is false, then what it states (lying) should be true, it conflicts;
however if this declaration is true, since it states I am laying, it should be false and lead
to conflict again. Whether what Eubulides said is true or not, all falls into contradiction.
This confusing problem is called ‘liar paradox’ .
There is a variance of liar paradox, appeared as two separated statements:
Achilles : The tortoise is a liar, he always lies. Do not trust him.
T ortoise : Dear Achilles, you are honest, you always speaks truth.
Is it true or false for what the tortoise said? If the tortoise tells the truth, then
what Achilles states is true. However, Achilles claims the tortoise is laying, it leads to
contradiction. On the contrary , if the tortoise lies, then what Achilles says is wrong, hence
the tortoise should be true. W e end up with a wired-loop: whether the tortoise speaks
truth or not, all leads to absurdity .
This two-segment liar paradox sometimes appears as a joke. Y ou receive a piece of
note: “The other side is nonsense. ” while when you flip to the other side, it writes: “The
other side is true. ” Which side is true? In a similar way , it reduces to contradiction.
Such paradox also appears in children’s story . A lion caught a rabbit. He is so happy ,
that he promise the rabbit: If you can guess what I am going to do, I’ll let you go;
otherwise I’ll eat you. The clever rabbit then answers: I guess you are going to eat me.
If the lion eats the rabbit, then the rabbit guesses correct, the lion should keep his
promise to let the rabbit go. However, if he let the rabbit go, it means the rabbit guesses
wrong. Hence the lion should eat the rabbit. The lion falls into the dilemma, he should
neither eat the rabbit, nor let the rabbit go. W e can imagine the rabbit silently runs away
when the lion keeps deep thinking.
According to the legend, after ancient Greek army defected Persian, the king decided
to do something kind to the captives – let them chose the way to be killed. According to226 CHAPTER 7. P ARADOX
what the captive said, if it is true, then cut head off, otherwise hang. A clever captive
said: “I think you are going to hang me. ” If the king hangs him, then what the captive
said is true. Hence he should be cut head according to the rule. But if cut his head
off, then it does not follow what the captive said. Hence he spoke falsehood, and should
be hanged. Whether cut head or hang, the king’s rule will not be conducted correctly .
F acing such struggled situation, the king did not only let this clever man go, but also
released all captives.
E. O. Plauen F ather and Son , 1930sIn Cervantes’ novel Don Quixote , there
is an interesting paradox in Part II, Chapter 51:
A deep river divides a certain lord ns estate into two
parts... over this river is a
bridge, and at one end a gallows and a sort of courthouse,
in which four judges sit to administer the law imposed by the
owner of the river, the bridge
and the estate. It runs like
this: “Before anyone crosses
this bridge, he must first state
on oath where he is going and
for what purpose. If he swears
truly, he may be al lowed to
pass; but if he tel ls a lie, he
shal l suffer death by hanging
on the gal lows there displayed,
without any hope of mercy. ” ...
Now it happened that they once put a man on his oath, and he swore that he
was going to die on the gal lows there – and that was al l. After due deliberation
the judges pronounced as fol lows: “If we let this man pass freely he wil l have
sworn a false oath and, according to the law, he must die; but he swore that
he was going to die on the gal lows, and if we hang him that wil l be the truth,
so by the same law he should go free. ”
Besides the liar paradox, the barber paradox is another popular puzzle. It was told
by British mathematician and logician, Bertrand Russel in 1919. In a small village, the
barber sets up a rule for himself: “He only shaves all those, and those only , who do not
shave themselves. ” Then the question is, does the barber shave himself? If he shaves
himself, the according to his rule, he should not shave himself; but if he does not, then
he should serve and shave himself. The barber falls into his own trap.
Russel discovered the paradox in set theory early in 1901. He collected and summarized
a series of paradoxes, and formalized them as a fundamental problem in set theory . People
called this kind of paradoxes as Russel l’s paradox . In Cantor’s naive set theory , Russell
considered the problem about if any set belongs to itself. Some sets do, while others not.
F or example the set of all spoons is obviously not another spoon; while the set of anything
that is not a spoon, is definitely not a spoon. Russell considered the latter, and extended
it to all such cases. He constructed a set R, which contains all sets that are not members
of themselves. Symbolically:
R=fxjx/2xg7.2. RUSSEL’S P ARADOX 227
Russell next asked, is R a member of R? According to logical law of excluded middle,
an element either belongs to a set, or does not. F or a given set, it makes sense to
ask whether the set belongs itself. But this well defined, reasonable question falls into
contradiction.
IfR is a member of R, then according to its definition, R only contains the sets that
are not members of themselves, hence R should not belong to R; On the contrary , if R is
not a member of R, again, from its definition, any set does not belong to itself should be
contained, hence Ris a member of R. Whether it is a member or not, gives contradiction.
F ormalized as:
R2R()R/2R
Russell explicitly gave the paradox in Cantor’s set theory .
Bertrand Russell, 1872 1970Bertrand Russell was born in 1872 in Monmouthshire
into a family of the British aristocracy . Both his parents died
before he was three, and his grandfather died in 1878. His
grandmother, the countess was the dominant family figure
for the rest of Russell’s childhood and youth. Her favourite
Bible verse, “Thou shalt not follow a multitude to do evil”,
became his motto.
Russell was educated at home by a series of tutors. When
Russell was eleven years old, his brother F rank introduced
him to the work of Euclid, which he described in his autobiography as “one of the great events of my life, as dazzling
as first love. ” During these years, he read about the poems of Percy Bysshe Shelley , and thought about religious
and philosophy . In 1890, Russell won a scholarship to read
for the Mathematical T ripos at T rinity College, Cambridge,
where he became acquainted with Alfred North Whitehead.
He quickly distinguished himself in mathematics and philosophy , graduating as seventh W rangler in the former in 1893 and becoming a fellow in the
latter in 1895.
Russell started an intensive study of the foundations of mathematics. He discovered
Russell’s paradox. In 1903 he published The Principles of Mathematics , a work on foundations of mathematics. It advanced a thesis of logicism, that mathematics and logic are
one and the same. The three-volume Principia Mathematica , written with Whitehead,
was published between 1910 and 1913. This, along with the earlier The Principles of
Mathematics, soon made Russell world-famous in his field.
After the 1950s, Russell turned from mathematics and philosophy to international
politics. He opposed nuclear war. The Russell ⚶Einstein Manifesto was a document calling
for nuclear disarmament and was signed by eleven of the most prominent nuclear physicists
and intellectuals of the time. Russell was arrested and imprisoned twice. The second time
he was in jail was at the age of 89, for “breach of peace” after taking part in an anti-nuclear
demonstration in London. The magistrate offered to exempt him from jail if he pledged
himself to “good behaviour”, to which Russell replied: “No, I won’t. ” In 1950 Russell won
the Nobel Prize for Literature. The committee described him as “in recognition of his
varied and significant writings in which he champions humanitarian ideals and freedom
of thought. ”
Russell died of influenza on F ebruary 2nd, 1970 at his home in Penrhyndeudraeth. In
accordance with his will, there was no religious ceremony; his ashes were scattered over
the W elsh mountains later that year.228 CHAPTER 7. P ARADOX
