# (7, 2, 1) Impact of Russell’s paradox

7.2.1 Impact of Russell’s paradox . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 228
7.2.1 Impact of Russell’s paradox
Russell was sad after discovering the paradox in the central of set theory . “What makes
it vital, what makes it fruitful, is the absolute unbridled Titanic passion that I have put
into it. It is passion that has made my intellect clear, ... it is passion that enabled me to
sit for years before a blank page, thinking the whole time about one probably trivial point
which I could not get right ... ”([ 8] pp.231) Russell wrote to mathematician and logician
Gottlob F rege about his paradox. F rege was about to build the foundation of arithmetic.
The second volume of his Basic Laws of Arithmetic was about to go to press. F rege was
surprised, he wrote: “Hardly anything more unwelcome can befall a scientific writer than
that one of the foundations of his edifice be shaken after the work is finished. This is
the position into which I was put by a letter from Mr Betrand Russell as the printing of
this volume was nearing completion... ” Russell’s paradox in axiomatic set theory was
disastrous. F urther, since set theory was seen as the basis for axiomatic development of
all other branches of mathematics, Russell’s paradox threatened the foundation. This
motivated a great deal of research around the turn of the 20th century to develop a
consistent (contradiction free) mathematics.
Exercise 7.1
1. W e can define numbers in natural language. F or example “the maximum of two
digits number” defines 99. Define a set containing all numbers that cannot be
described within 20 words. Consider such an element: “The minimum number
that cannot be described within 20 words” . Is it a member of this set?
2. “The only constant is change” said by Heraclitus. Is this Russell’s paradox?
3. Is the quote saying by Socrates (the beginning of this chapter) Russell’s paradox?
