# (7, 3, 3) F ormalism

7.3.3 F ormalism . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 231
7.3.3 F ormalism
The third mathematical school of thought is the F ormalism led by the German mathematician David Hilbert. Hilbert was one of the most influential and universal mathematicians
of the 19th and early 20th Centuries. He was born in 1862 in Königsberg, Eastern Prussia. He didn’t shine at school at first, but later received the top grade for mathematics.232 CHAPTER 7. P ARADOX
In 1880, Hilbert enrolled at the University of Königsberg, where he met and developed
lifelong friendship with Hermann Minkowski (two years younger than Hilbert), and associate professor Adolf Hurwitz (three years elder than Hilbert). Hilbert wrote: “During
innumerable walks, at times undertaken day after day , we roamed in these eight years
through all the corners of mathematical science. ”
David Hilbert, 1862-1943In 1895, invited by F elix Klein, he obtained the position of Professor of Mathematics at the University of Göttingen. He
remained there 48 years for the rest of his
life. During the Klein and Hilbert years,
Göttingen became the preeminent institution in the mathematical world. Students
and young mathematicians viewed Göttingen as the Mecca of mathematics: “Packed
a bag and go to Göttingen!”
Hilbert contributed to many branches
of mathematics. There are too many
terms, theorems named after him, that
even Hilbert himself did not know. He
once asked other colleagues in Göttingen
what ‘Hilbert space’ was. “If you think of
mathematics as a world. which it is, then Hilbert was a world conqueror. ” When he died,
Nature remarked that there was scarcely a mathematician in the world whose work did
not derive from that of Hilbert.[ 68]
Hilbert put forth a most influential list of 23 unsolved problems at the International
Congress of Mathematicians in Paris in 1900. This is generally reckoned as the most
successful and deeply considered compilation of open problems ever to be produced by
an individual mathematician. These were the problems which he considered most significant in mathematics at that time; not isolated questions but problems of such a general
character that their solution was bound to have an enormous influence on the shape of
future mathematics.
Among Hilbert’s students were Hermann W eyl, the famous world chess champion
Emanuel Lasker, and Ernst Zermelo. But the list includes many other famour names including Wilhelm Ackermann, F elix Bernstein, Otto Blumenthal, Richard Courant, Haskell
Curry , Max Dehn, Rudolf F ueter, Alfred Haar, Georg Hamel, Erich Hecke, Earle Hedrick,
Ernst Hellinger, Edward Kasner, Oliver Kellogg, Hellmuth Kneser, Otto Neugebauer, Erhard Schmidt, Hugo Steinhaus, and T eiji T akagi. F rom 1933, the Nazis purged many of
the prominent faculty members, included Hermann W eyl, Emmy Noether and Edmund
Landau. About a year later, the new Nazi Minister of Education, Bernhard Rust asked
whether “the Mathematical Institute really suffered so much because of the departure of
the Jews” . Hilbert replied, “Suffered? It doesn’t exist any longer, does it!” Hilbert died
in 1943 at age of 81. The epitaph on his tombstone in Göttingen consists of the famous
lines he spoke: “W e must know. W e will know. ”
Hilbert’s F oundations of Geometry published in 1899 proposes a formal set, called
Hilbert’s axioms, substituting for the traditional axioms of Euclid. It is the representative
work of axiomatization. Hilbert’s approach signaled the shift to the modern axiomatic
method. F rom 1904, Hilbert started studying the foundation of mathematics. In 1920
he proposed explicitly a research project that became known as Hilbert’s program. He
wanted mathematics to be formulated on a solid and complete logical foundation. It
opened the way for the development of the formalist school, one of three major schools of
mathematics of the 20th century . According to the formalist, mathematics is manipulation
of symbols according to agreed upon formal rules. It is therefore an autonomous activity7.3. PHILOSOPHY OF MA THEMA TICS 233
of thought.
The main goal of Hilbert’s program was to provide secure foundations for all mathematics. In particular this should include:
1. A formulation of all mathematics . In other words all mathematical statements
should be written in a precise formal language, and manipulated according to well
defined rules.
2. Completeness : a proof that all true mathematical statements can be proved in
the formalism.
3. Consistency : a proof that no contradiction can be obtained in the formalism of
mathematics. This consistency proof should preferably use only “finitistic” reasoning about finite mathematical objects.
4. Conservation : a proof that any result about “real objects” obtained using reasoning about “ideal objects” (such as uncountable sets) can be proved without using
ideal objects.
5. Decidability : there should be an algorithm for deciding the truth or falsity of any
mathematical statement.
T o execute his program, Hilbert initiated metamethematics, to study the mathematics
itself using mathematical methods. This study produces metatheories, which are mathematical theories about other mathematical theories. Such approach actually differentiates
three different mathematical systems:
1. Mathematics that is not formalized G: It’s the normal mathematics, that allows
classic logical reasoning. F or example, applying principle of excluded middle on
infinite set.
2. F ormalized mathematics H: All symbols, formulas, axioms, and propositions are
formalized. They are undefined concepts without any concrete meanings before
explanation. Once explained, they are the concepts in G. In other words, G is
the model of H, andH is formalized G. As Hilbert described: “One must be able
to say at all times iinstead of points, straight lines, and planes itables, chairs,
and beer mugs. ” With this approach, the specific meanings and background in
Euclid geometry are put aside, we only focus on the relations between the undefined
concepts, which are reflected through a collection of axioms.
3. Metamathematics K: This is the metatheories to study H. All reasoning in K
should be admitted intuitively . F or example, without applying principle of excluded
middle on infinite set.
While Hilbert and the mathematicians who worked with him in his enterprise were
committed to the project, a young mathematician Gödel proved incompleteness theorems,
which showed that most of the goals of Hilbert’s program were impossible to achieve. W e’ll
explain the details in later sections.
