# (7, 3, 2) Intuitionism

7.3.2 Intuitionism . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 230
7.3.2 Intuitionism
Some mathematicians took opposite approach to
build the foundation of mathematics called intuitionism. They thought mathematics was purely
the result of the constructive mental activity of
humans rather than the discovery of fundamental
principles claimed to exist in an objective reality .
Intuitionism can be backtracked to Blaise Pascal. Leopold Kronecker was the pioneer
mathematician hold intuitionism philosophy . Many world class mathematicians, including János Bolyai, Henri Lebesgue, Henri Poincaré, and Hermann W eyl support intuitionism. The founder is the Dutch mathematician Luitzen Egbertus Jan Brouwer. Brouwer
was bore in 1881 in Overschie near Rotterdam, Netherlands. He entered University of
Amsterdam in 1897, and soon demonstrated good mathematics capability . While still
an undergraduate Brouwer proved original results on continuous motions in four dimensional space and published his result in the Royal Academy of Science in Amsterdam
in 1904. Other topics which interested Brouwer were topology and the foundations of
mathematics.
Influenced by Hilbert’s list of problems proposed at the Paris International Congress
of Mathematicians in 1900, Brouwer put a very large effort to study typology from 1907 to
1913. The best known is his fixed point theorem, usually referred to now as the Brouwer
Fixed Point Theorem. This theorem states that in the plan every continuous function
from a closed disk to itself has at least one fixed point. He also extended this theorem
to arbitrary finite dimension. Specially , every continuous function from a closed ball of a
Euclidean space into itself has a fixed point. In 1910, Brouwer proved topological invariance of degree, then gave the rigours definition of topological dimension. Because of the
outstanding contribution to topology , he was elected a member of the Royal Netherlands
Academy of Arts and Sciences.
When Brouwer was a post graduate student, he was interested in the on-going debate
between Russell and Poincaré on the logical foundations of mathematics4. His doctoral
thesis in 1907 attacked the logical foundations of mathematics and marks the beginning
4Poincaré distinguished three kinds of intuition: an appeal to sense and to imagination, generalization
by induction, and intuition of pure number iwhence comes the axiom of induction in mathematics. The
first two kinds cannot give us certainty , but, he says, “who would seriously doubt the third, who would
doubt arithmetic?”[ 67 ]7.3. PHILOSOPHY OF MA THEMA TICS 231
of the Intuitionist School. His views had more in common with those of Poincaré and if
one asks which side of the debate he came down on then it would have with the latter.
Brouwer was killed in 1966 at the age of 85, struck by a vehicle while crossing the street
in front of his house.
L. E. J. Brouwer, 1881-1966Brouwer’s intuitionism came from his philosophy: mathematics is a intellectual human activity .
It does not exist outside our mind. Therefore, it
is independent from the real physical world. The
mind recognizes basic and clear intuitions. These
intuitions are not perceptual or empirical, but directly admit certain mathematical concepts, like integers. Brouwer believed that mathematical thinking is a process of intellectual construction. It
builds its own world, that is independent of experience, and is limited only by the basic mathematical intuition. The basic intuitive concepts should
not be understood as undefined in axiomatic theory , but should be conceived as something, as long
as they are indeed useful in mathematical thinking,
they can be used to understand various undefined
concepts in a mathematics.
In his 1908 paper, Brouwer rejected in mathematical proofs the principle of the excluded middle,
which states that any mathematical statement is either true or false, no other possibility is allowed. Brouwer denied that this dichotomy
applied to infinite sets. In 1918 he published a set theory , the following year a theory of
measure, and by 1923 a theory of functions, all developed without using the principle of
the excluded middle.
Henri Poincaré, 1854-1912Brouwer’s constructive theories were not easy to set up
since the notion of a set could not be taken as a basic concept but had to be built up using more basic notions. Because of this, Intuitionism rejected non-constructive existence proofs. F or example, Euclid’s proof about the existence of infinite many prime numbers was not acceptable
according to Brouwer because it does not give a way to construct the prime number.
In general, intuitionism was more critical than construction in the first decades of the 20th Century . Intuitionism
denied a large number of mathematical achievements, including irrational numbers, function theory , and Cantor’s
transfinite numbers. Many reasoning methods, like the principle of the excluded middle, were rejected. Therefore, it was
strongly opposed by other mathematicians. Hilbert said: “F or, compared with the immense expense of modern mathematics, what would wretched remnants mean, the few
isolated results incomplete and unrelated, that the intuitionists have obtained. ”
