# (7, 3, 4) Axiomatic set theory

7.3.4 Axiomatic set theory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 233
7.3.4 Axiomatic set theory
Different from the mathematical schools of logicism, intuitionism, and formalism, the
members of the set-theoretic school did not formulate their distinct philosophy at the
beginning, but they gradually gained adherents, and a program. This school today earns
as much as supporters as the other three we introduced.234 CHAPTER 7. P ARADOX
The set-theoretic school can be traced back to Cantor and Dedekind’s work. Although
both were primarily concerned with infinite sets, they found by establishing the concept of
natural numbers on basis of set, all of mathematics could then be derived. When Russell’s
paradox was found at the centre of Cantor’s set theory , some mathematicians believed
that the paradox was due to the informal introduction of sets. Cantor’s set theory is often
described today as ‘naive set theory’ . Hence the set theoretic thought that a carefully
selected axiomatic foundation would remove the paradoxes of set theory . Just as the
axiomatization of geometry and of the number system had resolved logical problems in
those areas. German mathematician Ernst Zermelo first took the axiomatization approach
in set theory in 1908.
Zermelo also believed the paradoxes arose because Cantor had not restricted the concept of a set. He therefore stressed with clear and explicit axioms to clarify what is meant
by a set, and what properties sets should have. In particular, he wanted to limit the size of
possible sets. He had no philosophical basis but sought only to avoid the contradictions.
His axiom system contained the undefined fundamental concepts of set and the relation
of one set being included in another. These and the defined concepts were to satisfy the
statements in the axioms. No properties of sets were to be used unless granted by the
axioms. In his system, the existence of infinite sets, the operations as the union of sets,
and the formation of subsets were provided as axioms. Zermelo also used the axiom of
choice[ 4].
(a) Ernst Zermelo, 1871-1953
 (b) Abraham F raenkel, 1891-1965
Zermelo’s system of axioms was improved by Abraham F raenkel in 1922. Zermelo did
not distinguished a set property and the set itself, they were used as synonymous. The
distinction was made by F raenkel. The system of axioms used mostly common by set
theorists is known as Zermelo-F raenkel system, abbreviated as ZF system. They both
saw the possibility of refined and sharper mathematical logic available in their time, but
did not specify the logical principles, which they thought were outside of mathematics,
and could be confidently applied as before[ 4].
Zermelo provided 7 axioms in his 1908 paper. Then in 1930, F raenkel, Skolem, and
V on Neumann suggested to add another two axioms. These axioms are as below:
1. Axiom of extensionality : T wo sets are equal if they have the same elements. F or
setA andB, ifAB andBA, thenA=B.
2. Empty set : The empty set exists.7.3. PHILOSOPHY OF MA THEMA TICS 235
3. Axiom schema of separation : Also known as axiom schema of specification.
Any property that can be formalized in the language of the theory can be used
to define a set. F or set S, if proposition p(x)is defined, then there exists set
T=fxjx2S,p(x)g.
4. Axiom of power set : One can form the power set (the collection of all subsets of
a given set) of any set. This process can be repeated infinitely .
5. Axiom of union : The union over the elements of a set exists.
6. Axiom of choice ğabbreviated as AC.
7. Axiom of infinity : There exists a set Z, containing empty set. F or any a2Z,
thenfag2Z. This axiom ensures infinite set exits.
8. Axiom schema of replacement : This axiom is introduced by F raenkel in 1922.
F or any function f(x)and setT, ifx2T, andf(x)is defined, there exits a set S,
that for all x2T, there is a y2S, such that y=f(x). It says that the image of a
set under any definable function will also fall inside a set.
9. Axiom of regularity : Also known as axiom of foundation. It was introduced by
V on Neumann in 1925. xdoes not belong to x.
As such, set theory was abstracted to a axiomatic system. Set turned to be an undefined concept that satisfies these axioms. They do not permit ‘all inclusive set’, hence
avoid the paradox, and fixed the defects in naive set theory . However, there were still
debate about which axioms were acceptable, particularly the axiom of choice is arguable.
Figure 7.12: Banach-T arski paradox: a solid ball can be decomposed and put back together into two copies of the original ball.
In 1924, Polish mathematicians Stefan Banach and Alfred T arski proved a theorem
called Banach-T arski paradox5. This theorem states that, if accept axiom of choice, then
for a solid ball in 3 dimensional space, there exists a decomposition of the ball into a
finite number of disjoint subsets, which can then be put back together in a different way
to yield two identical copies of the original ball. Indeed, the reassembly process involves
only moving the pieces around and rotating them without changing their shape. Banach
and T arski was going to reject axiom of choice through this theorem. However, their
proof looked so natural, that mathematicians tend to consider it only reflects the counter
intuitive fact about axiom of choice. Some set-theorists insist not to including axiom of
choice, such axiomatic set theory is called ZF system, while the one included axiom of
choice is called ZFC system. W e introduced the interesting relation between axiom of
choice and continuum hypothesis in previous chapter.
5Also known as Hausdorff-Banach-T arski theorem, or ‘Doubling sphere paradox’ .236 CHAPTER 7. P ARADOX
