# (7, 3, 1) Logicism

7.3.1 Logicism . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 228
7.3.1 Logicism
Gottlob F rege was a German philosopher, logician, and mathematician. He is understood
by many to be the father of analytic philosophy . F rege was the early representative of
logicism. His goal was to show that mathematics grows out of logic, and in so doing, he
devised techniques that took him far beyond the traditional logic. F rege treated the naive
set theory as a part of logic. In order to do that, he defined natural numbers with logic.
W e know that numbers are abstraction from concrete things. F or example 3 can represents
three persons, three eggs, three angles in a figure and so on. All these collections are a
class2containing 3 elements. Which one should be used to represent natural number
3? F rege’s idea is ‘all’ . All such classes that 1-to-1 correspondence can be established.
This is a infinite, abstract class that defines natural number 3. Although a bit complex,
it’s a great definition that free from culture limitation. No matter what language, what
symbol you are using, there won’t be any ambiguities to understand number 3 through
2F rege’s work was prior to Cantor’s, he used the term ‘class’, while Cantor later used ‘set’ in German7.3. PHILOSOPHY OF MA THEMA TICS 229
F rege’s method. This is because no symbol is needed in F rege’s definition. As such, F rege
managed to define number – which is the class of all classes. On top of this definition
and logical laws, F rege developed his theory of natural numbers, hence established logical
arithmetic. As the next step, he was going to develop all mathematics except for geometry
from logic. This is what F rege wanted to achieved in his book Basic Laws of Arithmetic .
F rege believed logical axioms were reliable and widely accepted. Once his work completed,
mathematics would be “fixed on an eternal foundation” .
Gottlob F rege, 1848-1925W e know what happened next. Just during the preparation of press for Basic Laws of Arithmetic , Russell’s letter
arrived ‘in time’ . F rege fell into confusions about Russell’s
paradox. His corner stone – using logic to define the concept
of numbers – is exactly about class of all classes. Such definition directly leads to logical paradox. F rege was shocked,
and finally gave up his logicism viewpoint.
Russell took over the torch of logicism. He then tried
to develop mathematics from logic in another way . Russell
believed all mathematics is symbolic logic. His logicism was
largely influenced by Italian mathematician Giuseppe Peano.
In 1900, Russell attended the International Congress of Philosophy in Paris. He wrote: “The Congress was the turning
point of my intellectual life, because there I met Peano... In
discussions at the Congress I observed that he was always
more precise than anyone else, and that he invariably got
the better of any argument on which he embarked. As the days went by , I decided that
this must be owing to his mathematical logic... It became clear to me that his notation
afforded an instrument of logical analysis such as I had been seeking for years... ” After
came back, Russell and Whitehead discussed the basic concepts of mathematics every
day . After hard work, they finally wrote the famous Principia Mathematica3. The three
volumes classic work about mathematical logic were published from 1910 to 1913. T o
solve the paradox, Russell pointed that: “An analysis of the paradoxes to be avoided
shows that they all result from a kind of vicious circle . The vicious circles in question
arise from supposing that a collection of objects may contain members which can only be
defined by means of the collection as a whole. ” He suggested: “Whatever involves all of
a collection must not be one of the collection” and call this the “vicious-circle principle” .
T o carry out this restriction, Russell and Whitehead introduced ‘theory of types’ .
The theory of types classified sets into levels. Individual elements, such as a person,
a number, or a particular book are of type 0; The sets of elements in type 0 are of type
1; The set of elements in type 1, which are sets of sets are of type 2... Every set is of
a well defined type. The objects in a proposition must belongs to its type. Thus if one
saysabelongs tob, thenbmust be of higher type than a. Also one cannot speak of a set
belonging to itself. Although this approach can avoid paradox, it is exceedingly complex
in practice. It took 363 pages till the definition of number 1 in Principia Mathematica .
Poincaré remarked: “eminently suitable to give an idea of the number 1 to people who have
never heard it spoken of before. ” The theory of types requires all works at their proper
type levels, propositions about integers have to be at the level of integers; propositions
about rationals have to be at the level of rationals. n/1 andnare at different levels, hence
should not be handled in one proposition at the same time. And the common statements
like “all the real numbers... ” are not valid any more, as multiple types of sets are involved.
The most questionable part is about axiom of reducibility ,axiom of choice , and axiom
of infinity . In order to handle natural numbers, real numbers, and transfinite numbers,
3Russell and Whitehead gave this Latin name in honor of Issac Newton’s Philosophiæ Naturalis Principia Mathematica .230 CHAPTER 7. P ARADOX
Russel and Whitehead accepted the axiom of infinity to support the concept of infinite
classes. They also accept one can chose elements from non-empty set or even infinite set
to form new set. Such two arguable axioms exist in set theory too. Many people opposed
to the axiom of reducibility particularly . T o support mathematical induction, this axiom
says any proposition at a higher level is coextensive with a proposition at type 0 level.
Poincaré pointed out it was disguised form of mathematical induction. But mathematical
induction is part of mathematics and is needed to establish mathematics, hence we cannot
prove consistency .
Alfred North Whitehead, 1861-1947Later Russell himself became more concerned:
“Viewed from this strictly logical point of view, I
do not see any reason to believe that the axiom
of reducibility is logically necessary , which is what
would be meant by saying that it is true in all possible worlds. The admission of this axiom into a
system of logic is therefore a defect, even if the axiom is empirically true. ”[ 4]
