# (7, 4) Gödel’s incompleteness theorems

7.4 Gödel’s incompleteness theorems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 236
7.4 Gödel’s incompleteness theorems
By 1930, there had been four separated, distinct, and more or less conflicting approaches
about mathematics foundation. Their supporters adherence to their own mathematical
schools. One could not say a theorem is correctly proven, because by 1930, he had to add
by whose standard, it was proven correct. The consistency of mathematics, which motivated these new approaches was not settled at all except if one argue that it’s the human
intuition guarantees consistency[ 4]. Hilbert was still planing his project optimistically to
prove the completeness and consistency of mathematics. All these were ended up by a
young mathematician and logician, Gödel.
Kurt Gödel, 1906-1978Kurt Gödel was born in 1906 in Brünn, AustriaHungary Empire (now Brno, Czech Republic) into
a German family . He had quite a happy childhood.
He had rheumatic fever and recovered at age 6.
However, 2 years later when read medical books
about the illness, he learnt that a weak heart was
a possible complication. Although there is no evidence that he did have a weak heart, Kurt became
convinced that he did, and concern for his health
became an everyday worry for him. In his family ,
young Kurt was known as “Mr. Why” because of
his insatiable curiosity .
In 1924, Gödel entered the University of Vienna.
he hadn’t decided whether to study mathematics or
theoretic physics until he learnt number theory . He
decided to take mathematics as his main subject
in 1926. Gödel was also interested in philosophy ,
and took part in seminars about mathematical logic. The exploration of philosophy and
mathematics set Gödel’s life course.
In 1929, at the age of 23, he completed his doctoral dissertation. In it, he established
his completeness theorem regarding the first-order predicate calculus. He was going to
further study Hilbert’s program to prove the completeness and consistency of mathematics
in finite steps. However, he soon developed an excepted result. In 1930 Gödel attended the
Second Conference on the Epistemology of the Exact Sciences, held in Königsberg. Here
he delivered his first incompleteness theorem, and soon, proved the second incompleteness
theorem.
Gödel worked at University of Vienna from 1932. In 1933, Adolf Hitler came to
power in Germany , the Nazis rose in influence in Austria academy over the following
years. In 1936, Moritz Schlick, whose seminar had aroused Gödel’s interest in logic, was
assassinated by one of his former students. This triggered “a severe nervous crisis” in
Gödel. He developed paranoid symptoms, including a fear of being poisoned. After the
world war II broken out, Gödel accepted the invitation from the Institute for Advanced
Study in Princeton, New Jersey . and moved to US. T o avoid the diﬀiculty of an Atlantic
crossing, the Gödels took the T rans-Siberian Railway to the Pacific, sailed from Japan
to San F rancisco, then crossed the US by train to Princeton. He met Albert Einstein
in Princeton, who became a good friend. They were known to take long walks together
to and from the Institute for Advanced Study . Einstein’s death in 1955 impacted him
a lot. In his later life, logician and mathematician W ang Hao was his close friend and
commentator.
Gödel’s married Adele Nimbursky , whom he had known for over 10 years on September
20th, 1938. Their relationship had been opposed by his parents on the grounds that she
was a divorced dancer, six years older than Gödel. Later in his life, Gödel suffered periods7.4. GÖDEL’S INCOMPLETENESS THEOREMS 237
of mental instability and illness. He had an obsessive fear of being poisoned; he would
eat only food that Adele prepared for him. Late in 1977, she was hospitalized for six
months and could subsequently no longer prepare her husband’s food. In her absence, he
refused to eat, eventually starving to death. He weighed 29 kilograms (65 lb) when he
died. His death certificate reported that he died of “malnutrition and inanition caused
by personality disturbance” in 1978. Because of the outstanding contributions in logic,
he was regarded as the greatest logician since Aristotle.
In 1931, Gödel published his paper titled On F ormal ly Undecidable Propositions of
Principia Mathematica and Related Systems . Where ‘Principia Mathematica’ is the work
of Russell and Whitehead. In that article, he proved for any computable axiomatic system
that is powerful enough to describe the arithmetic of the natural numbers:
1. If a system is consistent, it cannot be complete.
2. The consistency of axioms cannot be proved within their own system.
F or any consistency formal system, Gödel gave an undecidable statement G, that
can neither be proved nor disproved. This theorem is called Gödel’s first incompleteness
theorem. It tells that consistent formalized system is incomplete. As far as the system
is powerful enough to contain arithmetic of natural numbers, there will be problems
exceed it. One may ask, since G is undecidable, what if accept G orG’s negation as an
additional axiom, to obtain a more powerful system? However, Gödel soon proved the
second incompleteness. It tells that if a formal system containing elementary arithmetic,
then the consistency cannot be proved within its own system. Whether accept or reject
G, the new system is still incomplete. There always exists undecidable statement in the
higher level.
In Euclidean geometry for example, we can exclude the fifth postulate, to obtain the
axiomatic system with the first four postulates. However, we cannot prove the fifth postulate true or false. W e know that whether accept or reject the fifth postulate gives
consistent geometry – Euclidean geometry and varies of non-Euclidean geometries respectively . In axiomatic set theory ZF system, we cannot prove axiom of choice true
or false. Accepting it gives the consistent ZFC system; while rejecting it gives another
consistent system. After add the axiom of choice to establish ZFC system, we cannot
prove the continuum hypothesis true or false in ZFC. Accepting continuum hypothesis
gives a consistent system; while rejecting continuum hypothesis gives another consistent
system.
Figure 7.14: Escher, Angles and Devils, 1941238 CHAPTER 7. P ARADOX
Gödel’s first and second incompleteness theorems ended a half-century of attempts,
beginning with the work of F rege and culminating in Principia Mathematica and Hilbert’s
formalism, to find a set of axioms suﬀicient for all mathematics. Even the elementary
arithmetic system is consistent, such consistency cannot be proved within itself. As
mathematician André W eil said: “God exists since mathematics is consistent, and the
Devil exists since we cannot prove it. ”[ 8]
