# (7, 5, 2) Gödel numbering

7.5.2 Gödel numbering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 241
7.5.2 Gödel numbering
One critical step Gödel took was to introduce Gödel numbering. TNT system is powerful
enough to mirror other formal system, is it possible to mirror TNT by itself? What Gödel
thought is to ‘arithmetize’ the reasoning rules. T o do this, he assigned all symbols with
a number.
Axiom 1 is translated to such numerals:
8a ::S a = 0
626 262 636 223 123 262 111 666
The numbering scheme is not unique. It does not matter if one assigns different
numbers. With Gödel numbering, every TNT string can be represented as a number
(although it can be a very big number). The problem is in the other direction: given
any number, can we determine if it represents a TNT theorem? W e know the first five
TNT numbers, which represent the five axioms. With the TNT reasoning rules, we can
construct infinite many TNT numbers from these five numbers. Atop of this, we introduce
a number theory predication:
ais a TNT number.242 CHAPTER 7. P ARADOX
symbol number symbol number
0 666 S 123
= 111 + 112
 236 ( 362
) 323a 262
′163^ 161
_ 616! 633
: 2239 333
8 626 : 636
T able 7.1: A Gödel numbering to TNT
F or example, 626,262,636,223,123,262,111,666 is a TNT number (W e add commas to
make it easy to read), it represents axiom 1. Its negation form is:
:ais a TNT number.
F or example, 123,666,111,666 is not a TNT number. It means we can replace aby a
string of 123666111666 Ss and a 0. This huge string actually means: S0 = 0 is not a TNT
theorem. TNT system can really speak about itself. It is not an accidental feature, but
because of the fact that all formal systems are isomorphic to number theory N. Hence
we formed a circle: A TNT string has its interpretation in number theory N, while the
statement in N can have a second meaning, which is the metalanguage interpretation
about TNT.
TNT Number theory N Meta-TNTNumber theory interpretation Metalanguage statement
Figure 7.15: TNT ! number theory N! Meta-TNT
