# (7, 5, 1) F ormalize the system

7.5.1 F ormalize the system . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 238
Axioms and reasoning rules . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 239
Incompleteness of TNT . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 240
7.5.1 F ormalize the system
Here we use the method and terms, that Douglas Hofstadter wrote in his popular book
Gödel, Escher, Bach: An Eternal Golden Braid to introduce the proof sketch. Gödel’s
proof also starts from modeling a formal system. W e call this system “Typographical
Number Theory”, abbreviated as TNT. It happens to be the same abbreviation of T rinitrotoluene, a powerful explosive. Hofstadter intended to give this name to indicate it’s
powerful enough to destroy the building itself. TNT formalizes the number theory in
natural language into a series of typographical strings. Although sounds complex, we
can realize it step by step on top of the Peano Axioms we introduced in chapter 1. As
the first thing, we need define numbers. According to Peano’s axioms, zero is natural
number, every natural number has its successor, we can define the typographical string
for numbers as the following:
zero 0
one S0
two SS0
three SSS0
... ...
Where ‘S’ means successor, two letters, ‘SS’ mean the successor of a successor. A
hundred ‘S’s and a ‘0’ are the 100 times successor of zero, which is the natural number
100. Although it is very long, the rule itself is simple enough. With natural numbers
being defined, we need next define variables. T o make the system as simple as possible,
we only use 5 typographical letters a,b,c,d,e . When need more variables, we can simply
add primes like a′,a′′,a′′′. Next we need ‘ +’ for addition, ‘’ for multiplication, and the
parenthesis to control the arithmetic orders. T o formalize the proposition we need ‘ =’,
‘:’ for negation, and ! for implication. Here are some examples of formal propositions
(no matter their truth or falsehood):
• one plus two equals four: (S0 +SS0) =SSSS 0
• two plus two is not equal to five: :(SS0 +SS0) =SSSSS 07.5. PROOF SKETCH FOR THE FIRST INCOMPLETENESS THEOREM 239
• if one equals to zero, then zero equals one: (S0 = 0)!(0 =S0)
A proposition can have free variables, for example:
(a+SS0) =SSS 0
It meansaplus 2 equals 3. Obviously the value of adetermines if this proposition is
true or false. Therefore, we need universal quantifier 8, existential quantifier 9, and colon
‘:’ to indicate quantifier scope. The following proposition:
9a: (a+SS0) =SSS 0
means, there exists a, such that aplus 2 equals 3. Here is another example:
8a:8b: (a+b) = (b+a)
It is exactly the commutative law of addition for natural numbers. When remove the
quantifier for a, it changes to:
8b: (a+b) = (b+a)
This is a open formula, since ais free. It expresses a unspecified number acommutes
with all numbers b. It may or may not be true. In order to compose propositions, we need
logical conjunction (and) ^, logical disjunction (or) _. Although there are few symbols,
TNT is very expressive. Here are some examples:
2 is not the square of any natural numbers: :9a: (aa) =SS0
F ermat’s last theorem holds when nequals 3::9a:9b:9c: ((aa)a) + ((bb)b) =
((cc)c)
W e defined typographical symbols to express propositions so far. T o construct TNT
system, we also need axioms and reasoning rules.
Axioms and reasoning rules
F ollowing Peano’s axioms, we define 5 axioms for the TNT system:
1.8a::Sa= 0 , this axiom states that, zero is not the successor of any number;
2.8a: (a+ 0) = 0 , this axiom states that, any number plus 0 equals itself;
3.8a:8b: (a+Sb) =S(a+b), this axiom defines the addition for natural numbers;
4.8a: (a0) = 0 , this axiom states that, any number multiplies zero equals zero;
5.8a:8b: (aSb) = ((ab)+a), this axiom defines multiplication for natural numbers.
Next we establish reasoning rules. F or example, from axiom 1, that 0 is not the
successor of any number, we want to deduce a special case, that 1 is not the successor of
0. In order to do this, we introduce the rule of specification:
Rule of specification : Suppose uis a variable occurs in string x. If8u:xis a
theorem, then xis also a theorem, and any replacement of uinxwherever it occurs, also
gives a theorem.
There is a restriction, the term that replaces u, must not contain any variables that
is quantified in x. And the replacement should be consistent. The opposite rule to
specification is the rule of generalization. It allows us to add the universal quantifier
before a theorem.240 CHAPTER 7. P ARADOX
Rule of generalization : Supposexis a theorem, uis a free variable in it. Then
8u:xis a theorem.
F or example,:S(c+S0) = 0 means there is no such a number, that plus 1, then take
the successor gives 0. W e can generalize it as: 8c::S(c+S0) = 0 .
The next rule tells us how to convert universal and existential quantifiers.
Rule of interchange : Supposeuis a variable, then the string 8u::and:9u:are
interchangeable.
When applying this rule to axiom 1 for example, it transforms to :9a:Sa= 0 . The
next rule allows us to put a existential quantifier before a string.
Rule of existence : Suppose a term appears once or multiply in a theorem, then it
can be replaced with a variable, and add a corresponding existential quantifier in front.
Use axiom 1 for example again: 8a::Sa= 0 , we can replace 0 with a variable b, and
add the corresponding existential quantifier to give: ğ9b:8a::Sa=b. It states that,
there exists a number, such that any natural number is not its successor.
W e next consider the symmetry and transitivity for equality , and define rules. Let
r,s,t all stand for arbitrary terms.
Rules of quality :
• Symmetry: if r=sis a theorem, then s=ris also theorem;
• T ransitivity: if r=sands=tare theorems, then r=tis also theorem.
T o add or remove the successorship S, we define below rules.
Rules of successorship ğ
• Add: Ifr=tis theorem, then Sr=St is a theorem;
• Drop: IfSr=St is theorem, then r=tis a theorem.
So far, the TNT system is very powerful, we can construct complex theorems with it.
Exercise 7.2
1. T ranslate F ermat’s last theorem into a TNT string.
2. Prove the associative law of addition with TNT reasoning rules.
Incompleteness of TNT
With the axioms and reasoning rules in TNT system, we can prove a series of theorems
easily:
(0 + 0) = 0
(0 +S0) =S0
(0 +SS0) =SS0
(0 +SSS 0) =SSS 0
... ...
F rom axiom 2, we can deduce the first theorem by replacing awith 0; on top of this
theorem, and use axiom 3, we can obtain the second theorem; every theorem can be
deduced from the previous one. Observe this pattern, we immediately ask, why can’t we
summarize them to a theorem?
8a: (0 +a) =a
Note it is different from axiom 2. Unfortunately , we can’t reason this theorem with
all the rules in TNT so far. W e may want to add an additional rule: if all this series7.5. PROOF SKETCH FOR THE FIRST INCOMPLETENESS THEOREM 241
of strings are theorems, then the universally quantified string which summarizes them is
also a theorem. However, only human that outside TNT has this insight. It’s not a valid
rule for the formal system.
Lack of such summarize capability indicates TNT is incomplete. Accurately speaking,
a system with this kind of ‘defect’ is called ω incomplete. Where ω is the cardinal of
countable infinite set introduced in previous chapter. W e say a system is ωincomplete if
all the strings in a series are theorems, but the universal quantified summarizing string is
not a theorem. Incidentally , the negation of the summarizing string:
:8a: (0 +a) =a
is not a theorem of TNT too. It means the string is undecidable within TNT system.
The capability of TNT is not enough to determine this string is theorem or not. It just
likes the same situation, that with only the first four postulates in Euclidean geometry ,
the fifth postulation is undecidable. W e can either accept to add the fifth postulation
to obtain Euclidean geometry , or reject to add its negation to obtain non-Euclidean
geometry . Similarly , we can either add this string or its negation to TNT to construct
different formal systems.
It looks a bit counter intuitive if we chose the negation as theorem: zero plus any
number does not equal to this number any more. It’s quite different from the arithmetic
of natural numbers that familiar to us. It exactly reminds us, the concept in a formal
system is undefined. W e give it the meaning of addition for natural numbers only for the
purpose of easy understanding.
Theωincompleteness of TNT tells us, we are missing an important rule – you may have
already thought of – Peano’s fifth axiom that corresponding to mathematical induction.
Let’s add this last piece of tile to the puzzle.
Rule of induction : Supposeuis a variable in string X, denoted as Xu . If it is a
theorem when replace uwith 0, and8u:Xu!XSu . It means if X is a theorem for u,
so as it is when replace utoSu . Then8u:Xu is also a theorem.
With mathematical induction supported, TNT system now has the same capability
as Peano’s arithmetic.
Exercise 7.3
1. Prove that8a: (0 +a) =awith the newly added rule of induction.
