# (7, 6) Universal program and diagonal argument

7.6 Universal program and diagonal argument . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 243
7.6 Universal program and diagonal argument
What does Gödel’s incompleteness theorems mean to programming? W e have an exactly
isomorphic problem of programming. In order to see it, let us start from a formal computer
programming language, This language supports primitive recursive function. The so
called primitive recursive function is a kind of number theory functions, they can map
from natural numbers to natural numbers, and follow the 5 axioms:
1. Constant function: The 0-ary constant function 0 is primitive recursive;
2. Successor function: The 1-ary successor function S(k) =k+1 is primitive recursive;
3. Projection function: The n-ary function, which accepts narguments, and returns
itsi-th argument Pn
iis primitive recursive;
4. Composition: The result of finite many times composition of primitive functions is
still primitive recursive;
5. Primitive recursion: {
h(0) =k
h(n+ 1) =g(n,h(n))
W e sayhis computed from gthrough primitive recursion. It can be extended to
the case of multiple arguments.
The programming language that supports basic arithmetic like addition, subtraction,
if-then branches, equal, less than prediction, and bounded loop is called primitive recursive
programming language. The bounded loop means the number of loops are determined
beforehand. It can be loop without go-to statement, or for-loop that does not allow to
alter the loop variable inside it. However, it cannot be while loop, or repeat-until loop.
Because of these limitations, all primitive recursive programs must halt.
An important property of primitive recursive function is that, all primitive recursive
programs are recursively enumerable. Suppose we can list all primitive recursive functions
that with one input and one output, store them in a infinite big library . W e can number
each of them6, from 0, 1, 2, 3, ... And denote these programs as B[0],B[1],B[2],... . F or
thei-th program, when input n, it gives result B[i](n).
Now, we construct a special function f(n), when input n, its output is what the n-th
program’s output for nplus 1. Like this:
f(n) =B[n](n) + 1
Suchf is definitely computable. Now we ask whether f is a primitive recursive
program stored in our library? If yes, suppose its number in the library is m. According to
our numbering method, when input m to them-th program, the result should be B[m](m).
However, from the definition of f, its output should be f(m) =B[m](m) + 1 . These two
results are not equal obviously . The contradiction proves there exists computable function
that is not primitive recursive.
Our proof uses the same method as Cantor’s diagonal argument in previous chapter. W e have to relax the bounded loop limitation to make the programming language
more powerful. T o do that, we allow go-to statement in the loop to jump out; the loop
variable can be altered inside; we introduced while loop, repeat-until loop; and general
6One numbering method is to concatenate all ASCII codes of the program to form a number, then
sort them from less to big. Since each program is unique, their ASCII codes are different244 CHAPTER 7. P ARADOX
recursive functions. As such, we extend from primitive recursive function to total recursive function . This kind of programming language is called T uring-complete language.
Most computer programming languages are T uring-complete, which are isomorphic to the
formal systems like arithmetic of natural numbers. However, there is defect in T urningcomplete language, as we can construct the primitive recursive function of T uring halting
problem. It proves there exits incomputable problem. Is it possible to relax the limitation further, empower T urning-complete language, to design a universal program? The
answer is no. T urning-complete is at the highest level, that reaches to the limitation of
formal system. There is no other limitation can be relaxed any more. Gödel’s incompleteness theorems tell us, once the formal system is powerful enough to include arithmetic of
natural numbers, there must be undecidable problem in it.
